<article_start>  
Guatemala ( ; ) , officially the Republic of Guatemala ( Repblica de Guatemala links=no ) , is a country in Central America bordered by Mexico to the north and west , Belize and the Caribbean Sea to the northeast , Honduras to the east , El Salvador to the southeast and the Pacific Ocean to the south . With an estimated population of around million , it is the most populous country in Central America and has the 11th largest national population in the Americas . Guatemala is a representative democracy ; its capital and largest city is Nueva Guatemala de la Asuncin , also known as Guatemala City .
The core of the Maya civilization , which extended across Mesoamerica , was historically based in the territory of modern Guatemala . In the 16th century , most of this area was Spanish conquest of Guatemala and claimed as part of the viceroyalty of New Spain . Guatemala attained independence in 1821 as part of the Federal Republic of Central America , which dissolved by 1841.
From the mid- to late 19th century , Guatemala suffered chronic instability and civil strife . Beginning in the early 20th century , it was ruled by a series of dictators backed by the United Fruit Company and the United States Federal government of the United States . In 1944 , the authoritarian leader Jorge Ubico was overthrown by a pro-democratic military coup , initiating a Guatemalan Revolution decade-long revolution that led to sweeping social and economic reforms . A 1954 Guatemalan coup d'tat U.S.-backed military coup in 1954 ended the revolution and installed a dictatorship .
From 1960 to 1996 , Guatemala Guatemalan Civil War fought between the US-backed government and Left-wing politics rebels , including Guatemalan genocide of the Maya population perpetrated by the military . Since a United Nations-negotiated peace accord , Guatemala has achieved both economic growth and successful democratic elections , although it continues to struggle with high rates of poverty and crime , drug cartels , and instability . , Guatemala ranks 31st of 33 Latin American and Caribbean countries in terms of the Human Development Index .
Guatemala 's abundance of biologically significant and unique ecosystems includes many endemic species and contributes to Mesoamerica 's designation as a biodiversity hotspot .
== Etymology ==
The name `` Guatemala '' comes from the Nahuatl language word Cuauhtmalln : nah : Cuauhtmalln ( nahwiki ) , or `` place of many trees '' , a derivative of the K'iche ' people K'iche ' Mayan word for `` many trees '' or , perhaps more specifically , for the Cuate/Cuatli tree Eysenhardtia . This was the name that the Tlaxcala warriors who accompanied Pedro de Alvarado during the Spanish Conquest gave to this territory .
== History ==
=== Pre-Columbian ===
The first evidence of human habitation in Guatemala dates to 12,000 BC . Archeological evidence , such as obsidian arrowheads found in various parts of the country , suggests a human presence as early as 18,000 BC . There is archaeological proof that early Guatemalan settlers were [ Pollen samples from Petn Basin Petn ] and the Pacific coast indicate that [ [ maize cultivation had been developed by the people by 3500 BC . Sites dating to 6500 BC have been found in the Quich department region in the Highlands , and Sipacate and Escuintla on the central Pacific coast .
Archaeologists divide the Pre-Columbian era pre-Columbian history of Mesoamerica into the Preclassic period ( 2999 BC to 250 AD ) , the Classic period ( 250 to 900 AD ) , and the Postclassic period ( 900 to 1500 AD ) . Until recently , the Preclassic was regarded by researchers as a formative period , in which the peoples typically lived in huts in small villages of farmers , with few permanent buildings .
This notion has been challenged since the late 20th century by discoveries of monumental architecture from that period , such as an altar in La Blanca , San Marcos department , from 1000 BC ; ceremonial sites at Miraflores and Naranjo from 801 BC ; the earliest monumental masks ; and the Mirador Basin cities of Nakb , Xulnal , El Tintal , Wakn and El Mirador .
On 3 June 2020 , researchers published an article in Nature ( journal ) describing their discovery of the oldest and largest Maya site , known as Aguada Fnix , in Mexico . It features monumental architecture , an elevated , rectangular plateau measuring about 1,400 meters long and nearly 400 meters wide , constructed of a mixture of earth and clay . To the west is a 10-meter-tall earthen mound . Remains of other structures and reservoirs were also detected through the Lidar technology . It is estimated to have been built from 1000 to 800 BC , demonstrating that the Maya built large , monumental complexes from their early period .
The Classic period of Mesoamerican civilization corresponds to the height of the Maya civilization . It is represented by countless sites throughout Guatemala , although the largest concentration is in Petn Basin . This period is characterized by urbanisation , the emergence of independent city-states , and contact with other Mesoamerican cultures .
This lasted until approximately 900 AD , when the Classic Maya collapse . The Maya abandoned many of the cities of the central lowlands or were killed by a drought-induced famine . The cause of the collapse is debated , but the drought theory is gaining currency , supported by evidence such as lakebeds , ancient pollen , and others . A series of prolonged droughts in what is otherwise a seasonal desert is thought to have decimated the Maya , who relied on regular rainfall to support their dense population .
The Post-Classic period is represented by regional kingdoms , such as the Itza people , Kowoj , Yalain and Kejache in Petn , and the Mam people , K'iche ' people Ki'che ' , Kaqchikel people , Chajoma , Tz'utujil people Tz'utujil , Poqomchi ' people Poqomchi ' , Q'eqchi ' people Q'eqchi ' and Ch'orti ' people Ch'orti ' peoples in the highlands . Their cities preserved many aspects of Maya culture .
The Maya civilization shares many features with other Mesoamerican civilizations due to the high degree of interaction and cultural diffusion that characterized the region . Advances such as writing , epigraphy , and the Maya calendar did not originate with the Maya ; however , their civilization fully developed them . Maya influence can be detected from Honduras , Guatemala , and Northern El Salvador to as far north as central Mexico , more than from the Geography of Mesoamerica # Maya Region . Many outside influences are found in Maya art and architecture , which are thought to have resulted from trade and cultural exchange rather than direct external conquest .
==== Archaeological investigation ====
In 2018 , 60,000 uncharted structures were revealed in northern Guatemala by archaeologists with the help of Lidar technology lasers . The project applied Lidar technology on an area of 2,100 square kilometers in the Maya Biosphere Reserve in the Petn Department region of Guatemala . Thanks to the new findings , archaeologists believe that 7-11 million Maya peoples inhabited northern Guatemala during the late classical period from 650 to 800 A.D. , twice the estimated population of medieval England . Lidar technology digitally removed the tree canopy to reveal ancient remains and showed that Maya cities , such as Tikal , were larger than previously assumed . The use of Lidar revealed numerous houses , palaces , elevated highways , and defensive fortifications . According to archaeologist Stephen Houston , it is one of the most overwhelming findings in over 150 years of Maya archaeology .
=== Colonial era ( 15191821 ) ===
After they arrived in the New World , the Spanish started several expeditions to Guatemala , beginning in 1519 . Before long , Spanish contact resulted in an epidemic that devastated native populations . Hernn Corts , who had led the Spanish conquest of Mexico , granted a permit to Captains Gonzalo de Alvarado and his brother , Pedro de Alvarado , to conquer this land . Alvarado at first allied himself with the Kaqchikel people to fight against their traditional rivals the K'iche ' kingdom of Q'umarkaj K'iche ' ( Quich ) nation . Alvarado later turned against the Kaqchikel , and eventually brought the entire region under Spanish domination .
During the colonial period , Guatemala was an Audiencia Real , a Captaincy captaincy-general ( Captaincy General of Guatemala ) of Spain , and a part of New Spain ( Mexico ) . The first capital , Villa de Santiago de Guatemala ( now known as Tecpan Guatemala ) , was founded on 25 July 1524 near Iximch , the Kaqchikel capital city . The capital was moved to Ciudad Vieja on 22 November 1527 , as a result of a Kaqchikel attack on Villa de Santiago de Guatemala .
On 11 September 1541 , the new capital was flooded when the lagoon in the Volcanic crater of the Volcn de Agua collapsed due to heavy rains and earthquakes ; the capital was then moved to Antigua Guatemala in the Panchoy Valley , now a UNESCO World Heritage Site . This city was destroyed by several earthquakes in 17731774 . The King of Spain authorized moving the capital to its current location in the Ermita Valley , which is named after a Catholic church dedicated to the Virgin Mary . This new capital was founded on 2 January 1776.
=== Independence and the 19th century ( 18211847 ) ===
On 15 September 1821 , the Captaincy General of Guatemala , an administrative region of the Spanish Empire consisting of Chiapas , Guatemala , El Salvador , Nicaragua , Costa Rica , and Honduras , officially proclaimed its independence from Spain . Independence from Spain was gained , and the Captaincy General of Guatemala joined the First Mexican Empire under Agustn de Iturbide .
Under the First Empire , Mexico reached its greatest territorial extent , stretching from northern California to the provinces of Central America ( excluding Panama , which was then part of Colombia ) , which had not initially approved becoming part of the Mexican Empire but joined the Empire shortly after their independence . This region was formally a part of the New Spain throughout the colonial period , but as a practical matter had been administered separately . It was not until 1825 that Guatemala created its own flag .
In 1838 the liberal forces of Honduran leader Francisco Morazn and Guatemalan Jos Francisco Barrundia invaded Guatemala and reached San Sur , where they executed Cha Alvarez , father-in-law of Rafael Carrera , then a military commander and later the first president of Guatemala . The liberal forces impaled Alvarez 's head on a pike as a warning to followers of the Guatemalan caudillo . Carrera and his wife Petrona  who had come to confront Morazn as soon as they learned of the invasion and were in Mataquescuintla  swore they would never forgive Morazn even in his grave ; they felt it impossible to respect anyone who would not avenge family members .
After sending several envoys , whom Carrera would not receive  and especially not Barrundia whom Carrera did not want to murder in cold blood  Morazn began a scorched-earth offensive , destroying villages in his path and stripping them of assets . The Carrera forces had to hide in the mountains . Believing Carrera totally defeated , Morazn and Barrundia marched to Guatemala City , and were welcomed as saviors by state governor Pedro Valenzuela and members of the conservative , who proposed to sponsor one of the liberal battalions , while Valenzuela and Barrundia gave Morazn all the Guatemalan resources needed to solve any financial problem he had . The criollo people of both parties celebrated until dawn that they finally had a criollo caudillo like Morazn , who was able to crush the peasant rebellion .
Morazn used the proceeds to support Los Altos and then replaced Valenzuela with Mariano Rivera Paz , a member of the Aycinena clan , although he did not return to that clan any property confiscated in 1829 . In revenge , Juan Jos de Aycinena y Piol voted to dissolve the Central American Federation in San Salvador a little later , forcing Morazn to return to El Salvador to fight for his federal mandate . Along the way , Morazn increased repression in eastern Guatemala , as punishment for helping Carrera . Knowing that Morazn had gone to El Salvador , Carrera tried to take Salam with the small force that remained , but was defeated , and lost his brother Laureano in combat . With just a few men left , he managed to escape , badly wounded , to Sanarate . After recovering somewhat , he attacked a detachment in Jutiapa and got a small amount of booty which he gave to the volunteers who accompanied him . He then prepared to attack Petapa near Guatemala City , where he was victorious , although with heavy casualties .
In September of that year , Carrera attempted an assault on the capital of Guatemala , but the liberal general Carlos Salazar Castro defeated him in the fields of Villa Nueva , Guatemala and Carrera had to retreat . After unsuccessfully trying to take Quetzaltenango , Carrera found himself both surrounded and wounded . He had to capitulate to Mexican General Agustin Guzman , who had been in Quetzaltenango since Vicente Filsola 's arrival in 1823 . Morazn had the opportunity to shoot Carrera , but did not , because he needed the support of the Guatemalan peasants to counter the attacks of Francisco Ferrera in El Salvador . Instead , Morazn left Carrera in charge of a small fort in Mita , without any weapons . Knowing that Morazn was going to attack El Salvador , Francisco Ferrera gave arms and ammunition to Carrera and convinced him to attack Guatemala City .
Meanwhile , despite insistent advice to definitively crush Carrera and his forces , Salazar tried to negotiate with him diplomatically ; he even went as far as to show that he neither feared nor distrusted Carrera by removing the fortifications of the Guatemalan capital , in place since the battle of Villa Nueva . Taking advantage of Salazar 's good faith and Ferrera 's weapons , Carrera took Guatemala City by surprise on 13 April 1839 ; Salazar , Mariano Glvez and Barrundia fled before the arrival of Carrera 's militiamen . Salazar , in his nightshirt , vaulted roofs of neighboring houses and sought refuge , reaching the border disguised as a peasant . With Salazar gone , Carrera reinstated Rivera Paz as head of state .
Between 1838 and 1840 a Los Altos , Central America in the city of Quetzaltenango founded the breakaway state of Los Altos ( country ) and sought independence from Guatemala . The most important members of the Liberal Party of Guatemala and liberal enemies of the conservative rgime moved to Los Altos , leaving their exile in El Salvador . The liberals in Los Altos began severely criticizing the Conservative government of Rivera Paz . Los Altos was the region with the main production and economic activity of the former state of Guatemala . Without Los Altos , conservatives lost many of the resources that had given Guatemala hegemony in Central America . The government of Guatemala tried to reach a peaceful solution , but two years of bloody conflict followed .
In 1840 , Belgium began to act as an external source of support for Carrera 's independence movement , in an effort to exert influence in Central America . The Compagnie belge de colonisation ( Belgian Colonization Company ) , commissioned by Belgian Leopold I of Belgium , became the administrator of Santo Tomas de Castilla replacing the failed British Eastern Coast of Central America Commercial and Agricultural Company . Even though the colony eventually crumbled , Belgium continued to support Carrera in the mid-19th century , although Britain continued to be the main business and political partner to Carrera . Rafael Carrera was elected Guatemalan Governor in 1844.
German Guatemalans arrived in the mid-19th century . German settlers acquired land and grew coffee plantations in Alta Verapaz and Quetzaltenango .
=== Republic ( 18471851 ) ===
On 21 March 1847 , Guatemala declared itself an independent republic and Carrera became its first president .
During the first term as president , Carrera brought the country back from extreme conservatism to a traditional moderation ; in 1848 , the liberals were able to drive him from office , after the country had been in turmoil for several months . Carrera resigned of his own free will and left for Mxico . The new liberal regime allied itself with the Aycinena family and swiftly passed a law ordering Carrera 's execution if he returned to Guatemalan soil .
The liberal criollos from Quetzaltenango were led by general Agustn Guzmn who occupied the city after Corregidor general Mariano Paredes ( Guatemala ) was called to Guatemala City to take over the presidential office . They declared on 26 August 1848 that Los Altos was an independent state once again . The new state had the support of Doroteo Vasconcelos ' rgime in El Salvador and the rebel guerrilla army of Vicente and Serapio Cruz , who were sworn enemies of Carrera . The interim government was led by Guzmn himself and had Florencio Molina and the priest Fernando Davila as his Cabinet members . On 5 September 1848 , the criollos altenses chose a formal government led by Fernando Antonio Martnez .
In the meantime , Carrera decided to return to Guatemala and did so , entering at Huehuetenango , where he met with native leaders and told them that they must remain united to prevail ; the leaders agreed and slowly the segregated native communities started developing a new Indian identity under Carrera 's leadership . In the meantime , in the eastern part of Guatemala , the Jalapa region became increasingly dangerous ; former president Mariano Rivera Paz and rebel leader Vicente Cruz were both murdered there after trying to take over the Corregidor office in 1849.
When Carrera arrived to Chiantla in Huehuetenango , he received two altenses emissaries who told him that their soldiers were not going to fight his forces because that would lead to a native revolt , much like that of 1840 ; their only request from Carrera was to keep the natives under control . The altenses did not comply , and led by Guzmn and his forces , they started chasing Carrera ; the caudillo hid , helped by his native allies and remained under their protection when the forces of Miguel Garcia Granados arrived from Guatemala City looking for him .
On learning that officer Jos Vctor Zavala had been appointed as Corregidor in Suchitepquez , Carrera and his hundred jakaltek people bodyguards crossed a dangerous jungle infested with jaguars to meet his former friend . Zavala not only did not capture him , he agreed to serve under his orders , thus sending a strong message to both liberal and conservatives in Guatemala City that they would have to negotiate with Carrera or battle on two fronts  Quetzaltenango and Jalapa . Carrera went back to the Quetzaltenango area , while Zavala remained in Suchitepquez as a tactical maneuver . Carrera received a visit from a cabinet member of Paredes and told him that he had control of the native population and that he assured Paredes that he would keep them appeased . When the emissary returned to Guatemala City , he told the president everything Carrera said , and added that the native forces were formidable .
Guzmn went to Antigua , Guatemala to meet with another group of Paredes emissaries ; they agreed that Los Altos would rejoin Guatemala , and that the latter would help Guzmn defeat his enemy and also build a port on the Pacific Ocean . Guzmn was sure of victory this time , but his plan evaporated when in his absence Carrera and his native allies occupied Quetzaltenango ; Carrera appointed Ignacio Yrigoyen as Corregidor ( position ) and convinced him that he should work with the K'iche ' , Q'anjobal and Mam people leaders to keep the region under control . On his way out , Yrigoyen murmured to a friend : `` Now he is the king of the Indians , indeed ! ''
Guzmn then left for Jalapa , where he struck a deal with the rebels , while Luis Batres Juarros convinced President Paredes to deal with Carrera . Back in Guatemala City within a few months , Carrera was commander-in-chief , backed by military and political support of the Indian communities from the densely populated western highlands . During the first presidency , from 1844 to 1848 , he brought the country back from excessive conservatism to a moderate regime , and  with the advice of Juan Jos de Aycinena y Piol and Pedro de Aycinena  restored relations with the Church in Rome with a Concordat of 1854 ratified in 1854.
=== Second Carrera government ( 18511865 ) ===
After Carrera returned from exile in 1849 the president of El Salvador , Doroteo Vasconcelos , granted asylum to the Guatemalan liberals , who harassed the Guatemalan government in several different ways . Jos Francisco Barrundia established a liberal newspaper for that specific purpose . Vasconcelos supported a rebel faction named `` La Montaa '' in eastern Guatemala , providing and distributing money and weapons . By late 1850 , Vasconcelos was getting impatient at the slow progress of the war with Guatemala and decided to plan an open attack . Under that circumstance , the Salvadorean head of state started a campaign against the conservative Guatemalan regime , inviting Honduras and Nicaragua to participate in the alliance ; only the Honduras government led by Juan Lindo accepted . In 1851 Guatemala defeated an Allied army from Honduras and El Salvador at the Battle of La Arada .
In 1854 Carrera was declared `` supreme and perpetual leader of the nation '' for life , with the power to choose his successor . He held that position until he died on 14 April 1865 . While he pursued some measures to set up a foundation for economic prosperity to please the conservative landowners , military challenges at home and a three-year war with Honduras , El Salvador , and Nicaragua dominated his presidency .
His rivalry with Gerardo Barrios , President of El Salvador , resulted in open war in 1863 . At Coatepeque , Quetzaltenango the Guatemalans suffered a Battle of Coatepeque , which was followed by a truce . Honduras joined with El Salvador , and Nicaragua and Costa Rica with Guatemala . The contest was finally settled in favor of Carrera , who besieged and occupied San Salvador , and dominated Honduras and Nicaragua . He continued to act in concert with the Clerical Party , and tried to maintain friendly relations with European governments . Before he died , Carrera nominated his friend and loyal soldier , Army Marshall Vicente Cerna y Cerna , as his successor .
=== Vicente Cerna y Cerna regime ( 18651871 ) ===
Vicente Cerna y Cerna was president of Guatemala from 24 May 1865 to 29 June 1871 . Liberal author , described Marshall Cerna 's government in the following manner :
The State and Church were a single unit , and the conservative rgime was strongly allied to the power of regular clergy of the Catholic Church , who were then among the largest landowners in Guatemala . The tight relationship between church and state had been ratified by the Concordat of 1854 , which was the law until Cerna was deposed in 1871 . Even liberal generals like realized that Rafael Carrera 's political and military presence made him practically invincible . Thus the generals fought under his command , and waitedfor a long timeuntil Carrera 's death before beginning their revolt against the tamer Cerna . During Cerna 's presidency , liberal party members were prosecuted and sent into exile ; among them , those who started the Liberal Revolution of 1871.
In 1871 , the merchants guild , Consulado de Comercio , lost their exclusive court privilege . They had major effects on the economics of the time , and therefore land management . From 1839 to 1871 , the Consulado held a consistent monopolistic position in the regime .
=== Liberal governments ( 18711898 ) ===
Guatemala 's `` Liberal Revolution '' came in 1871 under the leadership of Justo Rufino Barrios , who worked to modernize the country , improve trade , and introduce new crops and manufacturing . During this era coffee became an important crop for Guatemala . Barrios had ambitions of reuniting Central America and took the country to war in an unsuccessful attempt to attain it , losing his life on the battlefield in 1885 against forces in El Salvador .
Manuel Barillas was president from 16 March 1886 to 15 March 1892 . Manuel Barillas was unique among liberal presidents of Guatemala between 1871 and 1944 : he handed over power to his successor peacefully . When election time approached , he sent for the three Liberal candidates to ask them what their government plan would be . Happy with what he heard from general Jos Mara Reyna Barrios , Barillas made sure that a huge column of Quetzaltenango and Totonicapn indigenous people came down from the mountains to vote for him . Reyna was elected president .
Jos Mara Reina Barrios was President between 1892 and 1898 . During Barrios 's first term in office , the power of the landowners over the rural peasantry increased . He oversaw the rebuilding of parts of Guatemala City on a grander scale , with wide , Parisian-style avenues . He oversaw Guatemala hosting the first `` Exposicin Centroamericana '' ( `` Central American Fair '' ) in 1897 . During his second term , Barrios printed bond ( finance ) s to fund his ambitious plans , fueling monetary inflation and the rise of popular opposition to his regime .
His administration also worked on improving the roads , installing national and international telegraphs and introducing electricity to Guatemala City . Completing a transoceanic railway was a main objective of his government , with a goal to attract international investors at a time when the Panama Canal was not built yet .
=== Manuel Estrada Cabrera regime ( 18981920 ) ===
After the assassination of general Jos Mara Reina Barrios on 8 February 1898 , the Guatemalan cabinet called an emergency meeting to appoint a new successor , but declined to invite Estrada Cabrera to the meeting , even though he was the designated successor to the Presidency . There are two different descriptions of how Cabrera was able to become president . The first states that Cabrera entered the cabinet meeting `` with pistol drawn '' to assert his entitlement to the presidency , while the second states that he showed up unarmed to the meeting and demanded the presidency by virtue of being the designated successor .
The first civilian Guatemalan head of state in over 50 years , Estrada Cabrera overcame resistance to his regime by August 1898 and called for elections in September , which he won handily . In 1898 the Legislature convened for the election of President Estrada Cabrera , who triumphed thanks to the large number of soldiers and policemen who went to vote in civilian clothes and to the large number of illiterate family that they brought with them to the polls .
One of Estrada Cabrera 's most famous and most bitter legacies was allowing the entry of the United Fruit Company ( UFCO ) into the Guatemalan economic and political arena . As a member of the Liberalism in Latin America , he sought to encourage development of the nation 's infrastructure of [ railroad ] s , and [ [ sea ports for the sake of expanding the export economy . By the time Estrada Cabrera assumed the presidency there had been repeated efforts to construct a railroad from the major port of Puerto Barrios to the capital , Guatemala City . Due to lack of funding exacerbated by the collapse of the internal coffee trade , the railway fell short of its goal . Estrada Cabrera decided , without consulting the legislature or judiciary , that striking a deal with the UFCO was the only way to finish the railway . Cabrera signed a contract with UFCO 's Minor Cooper Keith in 1904 that gave the company tax exemptions , land grants , and control of all railroads on the Atlantic side .
Estrada Cabrera often employed brutal methods to assert his authority . Right at the beginning of his first presidential period he started prosecuting his political rivals and soon established a well-organized web of spies . One American ambassador returned to the United States after he learned the dictator had given orders to poison him . Former President Manuel Barillas was stabbed to death in Mexico City . Estrada Cabrera responded violently to workers ' strikes against UFCO . In one incident , when UFCO went directly to Estrada Cabrera to resolve a strike ( after the armed forces refused to respond ) , the president ordered an armed unit to enter a workers ' compound . The forces `` arrived in the night , firing indiscriminately into the workers ' sleeping quarters , wounding and killing an unspecified number . ''
In 1906 Estrada faced serious revolts against his rule ; the rebels were supported by the governments of some of the other Central American nations , but Estrada succeeded in putting them down . Elections were held by the people against the will of Estrada Cabrera and thus he had the president-elect murdered in retaliation . In 1907 Estrada narrowly survived an assassination attempt when a bomb exploded near his carriage . It has been suggested that the extreme despotic characteristics of Estrada did not emerge until after an attempt on his life in 1907.
Guatemala City was badly damaged in the 1917 Guatemala earthquake .
Estrada Cabrera continued in power until forced to resign after new revolts in 1920 . By that time his power had declined drastically and he was reliant upon the loyalty of a few generals . While the United States threatened intervention if he was removed through revolution , a bipartisan coalition came together to remove him from the presidency . He was removed from office after the national assembly charged that he was mentally incompetent , and appointed Carlos Herrera in his place on 8 April 1920.
=== Jorge Ubico regime ( 19311944 ) ===
The Great Depression began in 1929 and badly damaged the Guatemalan economy , causing a rise in unemployment , and leading to unrest among workers and laborers . Afraid of a popular revolt , the Guatemalan landed elite lent their support to Jorge Ubico , who had become well known for `` efficiency and cruelty '' as a provincial governor . Ubico won the election that followed in 1931 , in which he was the only candidate . After his election his policies quickly became authoritarian . He replaced the system of debt peonage with a brutally enforced vagrancy ( people ) law , requiring all men of working age who did not own land to work a minimum of 100 days of hard labor . His government used unpaid Indian labor to build roads and railways . Ubico also froze wages at very low levels , and passed a law allowing land-owners complete immunity from prosecution for any action they took to defend their property , an action described by historians as legalizing murder . He greatly strengthened the police force , turning it into one of the most efficient and ruthless in Latin America . He gave them greater authority to shoot and imprison people suspected of breaking the labor laws . These laws created tremendous resentment against him among agricultural laborers . The government became highly militarized ; under his rule , every provincial governor was a general in the army .
Ubico continued his predecessor 's policy of making massive concessions to the United Fruit Company , often at a cost to Guatemala . He granted the company of public land in exchange for a promise to build a port , a promise he later waived . Since its entry into Guatemala , the United Fruit Company had expanded its land-holdings by displacing farmers and converting their farmland to banana plantations . This process accelerated under Ubico 's presidency , with the government doing nothing to stop it . The company received import duty and real estate tax exemptions from the government and controlled more land than any other individual or group . It also controlled the sole railroad in the country , the sole facilities capable of producing electricity , and the port facilities at Puerto Barrios on the Atlantic coast .
Ubico saw the United States as an ally against the supposed communist threat of Mexico , and made efforts to gain its support . When the US [ United States declaration of war upon Germany ( 1941 ) declared war ] ] against Germany in 1941 , Ubico acted on American instructions and arrested all people in Guatemala of German Guatemalan . He also permitted the US to establish an air base in Guatemala , with the stated aim of protecting the Panama Canal . However , Ubico was an admirer of European Fascisms , such as Francisco Franco and Benito Mussolini , and considered himself to be `` another Napoleon Bonaparte '' . He occasionally compared himself to Adolf Hitler . He dressed ostentatiously and surrounded himself with statues and paintings of Napoleon , regularly commenting on the similarities between their appearances . He militarized numerous political and social institutionsincluding the post office , schools , and symphony orchestrasand placed military officers in charge of many government posts .
=== Guatemalan Revolution ( 19441954 ) ===
On 1 July 1944 Ubico was forced to resign from the presidency in response to a wave of protests and a general strike inspired by brutal labor conditions among plantation workers . His chosen replacement , General Juan Federico Ponce Vaides , was forced out of office on 20 October 1944 by a coup d'tat led by Major Francisco Javier Arana and Captain Jacobo rbenz Guzmn . About 100 people were killed in the coup . The country was then led by a military junta made up of Arana , rbenz , and Jorge Toriello Garrido .
The junta organized Guatemala 's first free election , which the philosophically conservative writer and teacher Juan Jos Arvalo , who wanted to turn the country into a liberalism capitalism society won with a majority of 86 % . His `` Christian socialism '' policies were inspired to a large extent by the U.S. New Deal of President Franklin D. Roosevelt during the Great Depression . Arvalo built new health centers , increased funding for education , and drafted a more liberal labor law , while criminalizing unions in workplaces with less than 500 workers , and cracking down on communists . Although Arvalo was popular among nationalists , he had enemies in the church and the military , and faced at least 25 coup attempts during his presidency .
Arvalo was constitutionally prohibited from contesting the 1950 elections . The largely free and fair elections were won by Jacobo rbenz Guzmn , Arvalo 's defense minister . rbenz continued the moderate capitalist approach of Arvalo . His most important policy was Decree 900 , a sweeping agrarian reform bill passed in 1952 . Decree 900 transferred uncultivated land to landless peasants . Only 1,710 of the nearly 350,000 private land-holdings were affected by the law , which benefited approximately 500,000 individuals , or one-sixth of the population .
=== Coup and civil war ( 19541996 ) ===
Despite their popularity within the country , the reforms of the Guatemalan Revolution were disliked by the United States government , which was predisposed by the Cold War to see it as communist , and the United Fruit Company ( UFCO ) , whose hugely profitable business had been affected by the end to brutal labor practices . The attitude of the U.S. government was also influenced by a propaganda campaign carried out by the UFCO .
U.S. President Harry Truman authorized Operation PBFortune to topple rbenz in 1952 , with the support of Nicaraguan dictator Anastasio Somoza Garca , but the operation was aborted when too many details became public . Dwight D. Eisenhower was elected U.S. President in 1952 , promising to take a harder line against communism ; the close links that his staff members John Foster Dulles and Allen Dulles had to the UFCO also predisposed him to act against rbenz . Eisenhower authorized the CIA to carry out Operation PBSuccess in August 1953 . The CIA armed , funded , and trained a force of 480 men led by Carlos Castillo Armas . The force invaded Guatemala on 18 June 1954 , backed by a heavy campaign of psychological warfare , including bombings of Guatemala City and an anti-rbenz radio station claiming to be genuine news . The invasion force fared poorly militarily , but the psychological warfare and the possibility of a U.S. invasion intimidated the Guatemalan army , which refused to fight . rbenz resigned on 27 June .
Following negotiations in San Salvador , Carlos Castillo Armas became President on 7 July 1954 . Elections were held in early October , from which all political parties were barred from participating . Castillo Armas was the only candidate and won the election with 99 % of the vote . Castillo Armas reversed Decree 900 and ruled until 26 July 1957 , when he was assassinated by Romeo Vsquez , a member of his personal guard . After the rigged election that followed , General Jos Miguel Ramn Ydgoras Fuentes assumed power . He is celebrated for challenging the Mexican president to a gentleman 's duel on the bridge on the south border to end a feud on the subject of illegal fishing by Mexican boats on Guatemala 's Pacific coast , two of which were sunk by the Guatemalan Air Force . Ydigoras authorized the training of 5,000 anti-Fidel Castro Cubans in Guatemala . He also provided airstrips in the region of Petn ( department ) for what later became the US-sponsored , failed Bay of Pigs Invasion in 1961 . Ydigoras ' government was ousted in 1963 when the Guatemalan Air Force attacked several military bases ; the coup was led by his Defense Minister , Colonel Enrique Peralta Azurdia .
In 1963 , the junta called an election , which permitted Arevalo to return from exile and run . However , a coup from within the military , backed by the Kennedy Administration , prevented the election from taking place , and forestalled a likely victory for Arevalo . The new rgime intensified the campaign of terror against the guerrillas that had begun under Ydgoras-Fuentes .
In 1966 , Julio Csar Mndez Montenegro was elected president of Guatemala under the banner `` Democratic Opening '' . Mendez Montenegro was the candidate of the Revolutionary Party , a center-left party that had its origins in the post-Ubico era . During this time rightist paramilitary organizations , such as the `` White Hand '' ( Mano Blanca ) , and the Anticommunist Secret Army ( Ejrcito Secreto Anticomunista ) were formed . Those groups were the forerunners of the infamous `` Death squad '' . Military advisers from the Special Forces ( United States Army ) ( Green Berets ) were sent to Guatemala to train these troops and help transform the army into a modern counter-insurgency force , which eventually made it the most sophisticated in Central America .
In 1970 , Colonel Carlos Manuel Arana Osorio was elected president . By 1972 , members of the guerrilla movement entered the country from Mexico and settled in the Western Highlands . In the Guatemalan general election , 1974 , General Kjell Eugenio Laugerud Garca defeated General Efran Ros Montt , a candidate of the Christian Democratic Party , who claimed that he had been cheated out of a victory through fraud .
On 4 February 1976 , a major earthquake destroyed several cities and caused more than 25,000 deaths , especially among the poor , whose housing was substandard . The government 's failure to respond rapidly to the aftermath of the earthquake and to relieve homelessness gave rise to widespread discontent , which contributed to growing popular unrest . General Romeo Lucas Garca assumed power in 1978 in a fraudulent election .
The 1970s saw the rise of two new guerrilla organizations , the Guerrilla Army of the Poor ( EGP ) and the Organization of the People in Arms ( ORPA ) . They began guerrilla attacks that included urban and rural warfare , mainly against the military and some civilian supporters of the army . The army and the paramilitary forces responded with a brutal counter-insurgency campaign that resulted in tens of thousands of civilian deaths . In 1979 , the U.S. president , Jimmy Carter , who had until then been providing public support for the government forces , ordered a ban on all military aid to the Guatemalan Army because of its widespread and systematic abuse of human rights . However , documents have since come to light that suggest that American aid continued throughout the Carter years , through clandestine channels .
On 31 January 1980 , a group of indigenous K'iche ' people K'iche ' took over the Spanish Embassy to protest army massacres in the countryside . The Guatemalan government armed forces launched an assault that killed almost everyone inside in a Burning of the Spanish Embassy . The Guatemalan government claimed that the activists set the fire , thus Self-immolation themselves . However the Spanish ambassador survived the fire and disputed this claim , saying that the Guatemalan police intentionally killed almost everyone inside and set the fire to erase traces of their acts . As a result , the government of Spain broke off diplomatic relations with Guatemala .
This government was overthrown in 1982 and General Efran Ros Montt was named President of the military junta . He continued the bloody campaign of torture , forced disappearances , and `` scorched earth '' warfare . The country became a pariah state internationally , although the regime received considerable support from the Reagan Administration , and Reagan himself described Ros Montt as `` a man of great personal integrity . '' Ros Montt was overthrown by General scar Humberto Meja Victores , who called for an election of a national constituent assembly to write a new constitution , leading to a free election in 1986 , won by Marco Vinicio Cerezo Arvalo , the candidate of the Christian Democracy Party .
In 1982 , the four guerrilla groups , EGP , ORPA , FAR and PGT , merged and formed the Guatemalan National Revolutionary Unity , influenced by the El Salvador guerrilla Farabundo Mart National Liberation Front , the Nicaraguan Sandinista National Liberation Front and Cuba 's government , in order to become stronger . As a result of the Army 's `` scorched earth '' tactics in the countryside , more than 45,000 Guatemalans fled across the border to Mexico . The Mexican government placed the refugees in camps in Chiapas and Tabasco .
In 1992 , the Nobel Peace Prize was awarded to Rigoberta Mench for her efforts to bring international attention to the government-sponsored Guatemalan genocide .
=== 19962000 ===
The Guatemalan Civil War ended in 1996 with a peace accord between the guerrillas and the government , negotiated by the United Nations through intense brokerage by nations such as Norway and Spain . Both sides made major concessions . The guerrilla fighters disarmed and received land to work . According to the U.N.-sponsored truth commission ( the Commission for Historical Clarification ) , government forces and state-sponsored , CIA-trained paramilitaries were responsible for over 93 % of the human rights violations during the war .
In the last few years , millions of documents related to crimes committed during the civil war have been found abandoned by the former Guatemalan police . The families of over 45,000 Guatemalan activists who Forced Disappearance during the civil war are now reviewing the documents , which have been digitized . This could lead to further legal actions .
During the first ten years of the civil war , the victims of the state-sponsored terror were primarily students , workers , professionals , and opposition figures , but in the last years they were thousands of mostly rural Maya peoples farmers and non-combatants . More than 450 Maya villages were destroyed and over 1 million people became refugees or displaced within Guatemala .
In 1995 , the Catholic Archdiocese of Guatemala began the Recovery of Historical Memory ( REMHI ) project , known in Spanish as `` El Proyecto de la Recuperacin de la Memoria Histrica '' , to collect the facts and history of Guatemala 's long civil war and confront the truth of those years . On 24 April 1998 , REMHI presented the results of its work in the report `` Guatemala : Nunca Ms ! '' . This report summarized testimony and statements of thousands of witnesses and victims of repression during the Civil War . `` The report laid the blame for 80 per cent of the atrocities at the door of the Guatemalan Army and its collaborators within the social and political elite . ''
Catholic Bishop Juan Jos Gerardi Conedera worked on the Recovery of Historical Memory Project and two days after he announced the release of its report on victims of the Guatemalan Civil War , `` Guatemala : Nunca Ms ! `` , in April 1998 , Bishop Gerardi was attacked in his garage and beaten to death . In 2001 , in the first trial in a civilian court of members of the military in Guatemalan history , three Army officers were convicted of his death and sentenced to 30 years in prison . A priest was convicted as an accomplice and was sentenced to 20 years in prison .
According to the report , Recuperacin de la Memoria Histrica ( REMHI ) , some 200,000 people died . More than one million people were forced to flee their homes and hundreds of villages were destroyed . The Historical Clarification Commission attributed more than 93 % of all documented violations of human rights to Guatemala 's military government , and estimated that Maya Indians accounted for 83 % of the victims . It concluded in 1999 that state actions constituted genocide .
In some areas such as Baja Verapaz , the Truth Commission found that the Guatemalan state engaged in an intentional policy of genocide against particular ethnic groups in the Guatemalan Civil War . In 1999 , U.S. president Bill Clinton said that the United States had been wrong to have provided support to the Guatemalan military forces that took part in these brutal civilian killings .
=== Since 2000 ===
Since the peace accords Guatemala has had both economic growth and successive democratic elections , most recently in 2019 . In the 2019 elections , Alejandro Giammattei won the presidency . He assumed office in January 2020.
In January 2012 Efrain Rios Montt , the former dictator of Guatemala , appeared in a Guatemalan court on genocide charges . During the hearing , the government presented evidence of over 100 incidents involving at least 1,771 deaths , 1,445 rapes , and the displacement of nearly 30,000 Guatemalans during his 17-month rule from 1982 to 1983 . The prosecution wanted him incarcerated because he was viewed as a flight risk but he remained free on bail , under house arrest and guarded by the Guatemalan National Civil Police ( PNC ) . On 10 May 2013 , Rios Montt was found guilty and sentenced to 80 years in prison . It marked the first time that a national court had found a former head of state guilty of genocide . The conviction was later overturned , and Montt 's trial resumed in January 2015 . In August 2015 , a Guatemalan court ruled that Rios Montt could stand trial for genocide and crimes against humanity , but that he could not be sentenced due to his age and deteriorating health .
Ex-President Alfonso Portillo was arrested in January 2010 while trying to flee Guatemala . He was acquitted in May 2010 , by a panel of judges that threw out some of the evidence and discounted certain witnesses as unreliable . The Guatemalan Attorney-General , Claudia Paz y Paz , called the verdict `` a terrible message of injustice , '' and `` a wake up call about the power structures . '' In its appeal , the International Commission Against Impunity in Guatemala ( CICIG ) , a UN judicial group assisting the Guatemalan government , called the decision 's assessment of the meticulously-documented evidence against Portillo Cabrera `` whimsical '' and said the decision 's assertion that the president of Guatemala and his ministers had no responsibility for handling public funds ran counter to the constitution and laws of Guatemala . A New York grand jury had indicted Portillo Cabrera in 2009 for embezzlement ; following his acquittal on those charges in Guatemala that country 's Supreme Court authorized his extradition to the US . The Guatemalan judiciary is deeply corrupt and the selection committee for new nominations has been captured by criminal elements .
=== Prez Molina government and `` La Lnea '' ===
Retired general Otto Prez Molina was elected president in 2011 along with Roxana Baldetti , the first woman ever elected vice-president in Guatemala ; they began their term in office on 14 January 2012 . But on 16 April 2015 , a United Nations ( UN ) anti-corruption agency report implicated several high-profile politicians including Baldetti 's private secretary , Juan Carlos Monzn , and the director of the Guatemalan Internal Revenue Service ( SAT ) . The revelations provoked more public outrage than had been seen since the presidency of General Kjell Eugenio Laugerud Garca . The International Commission against Impunity in Guatemala ( CICIG ) worked with the Guatemalan attorney-general to reveal the scam known as `` La Lnea corruption case '' , following a year-long investigation that included telephone tapping .
Officials received bribes from importers in exchange for discounted import tariffs , a practice rooted in a long tradition of customs corruption in the country , as a fund-raising tactic of successive military governments for counterinsurgency operations during Guatemala 's 36-year-long Guatemala Civil War .
A Facebook event using the hashtag # RenunciaYa ( Resign Now ) invited citizens to go downtown in Guatemala City to ask for Baldetti 's resignation . Within days , over 10,000 people RSVPed that they would attend . Organisers made clear that no political party or group was behind the event , and instructed protesters at the event to follow the law . They also urged people to bring water , food and sunblock , but not to cover their faces or wear political party colors . Tens of thousands of people took to the streets of Guatemala City . They protested in front of the presidential palace . Baldetti resigned a few days later . She was forced to remain in Guatemala when the United States revoked her visa . The Guatemalan government arraigned her , since it had enough evidence to suspect her involvement in the `` La Linea '' scandal . The prominence of US Ambassador Todd Robinson in the Guatemalan political scene once the scandal broke led to the suspicion that the US government was behind the investigation , perhaps because it needed an honest government in Guatemala to counter the presence of China and Russia in the region .
The UN anti-corruption committee has reported on other cases since then , and more than 20 government officials have stepped down . Some were arrested . Two of those cases involved two former presidential private secretaries : Juan de Dios Rodrguez in the Guatemalan Social Service and Gustave Martnez , who was involved in a bribery scandal at the coal power plant company . Martnez was also Perez Molina 's son-in-law .
Leaders of the political opposition have also been implicated in CICIG investigations : several legislators and members of Libertad Democrtica Renovada party ( LIDER ) were formally accused of bribery-related issues , prompting a large decline in the electoral prospects of its presidential candidate , Manuel Baldizn , who until April had been almost certain to become the next Guatemalan president in the 6 September 2015 presidential elections . Baldizn 's popularity steeply declined and he filed accusations with the Organization of American States against CICIG leader Ivn Velsquez of international obstruction in Guatemalan internal affairs .
CICIG reported its cases so often on Thursdays that Guatemalans coined the term `` CICIG Thursdays '' . But a Friday press conference brought the crisis to its peak : on Friday 21 August 2015 , the CICIG and Attorney General Thelma Aldana presented enough evidence to convince the public that both President Prez Molina and former vice President Baldetti were the actual leaders of `` La Lnea '' . Baldetti was arrested the same day and an impeachment was requested for the president . Several cabinet members resigned and the clamor for the president 's resignation grew after Perez Molina defiantly assured the nation in a televised message broadcast on 23 August 2015 that he was not going to resign .
Thousands of protesters took to the streets again , this time to demand the increasingly isolated president 's resignation . Guatemala 's Congress named a commission of five legislators to consider whether to remove the president 's immunity from prosecution . The Supreme Court approved . A major day of action kicked off early on 27 August , with marches and roadblocks across the country . Urban groups who had spearheaded regular protests since the scandal broke in April , on the 27th sought to unite with the rural and indigenous organizations who orchestrated the road blocks .
The strike in Guatemala City was full of a diverse and peaceful crowd ranging from the indigenous poor to the well-heeled , and it included many students from public and private universities . Hundreds of schools and businesses closed in support of the protests . The Comit Coordinador de Asociaciones Agrcolas , Comerciales , Industriales y Financieras ( CACIF ) Guatemala 's most powerful business leaders , issued a statement demanding that Prez Molina step down , and urged Congress to withdraw his immunity from prosecution .
The attorney general 's office released its own statement , calling for the president 's resignation `` to prevent ungovernability that could destabilize the nation . '' As pressure mounted , the president 's former ministers of defence and of the interior , who had been named in the corruption investigation and resigned , abruptly left the country . Prez Molina meanwhile had been losing support by the day . The private sector called for his resignation ; however , he also managed to get support from entrepreneurs that were not affiliated with the private sector chambers : Mario Lpez Estrada  grandchild of former dictator Manuel Estrada Cabrera and the billionaire owner of cellular phone companies  had some of his executives assume the vacated cabinet positions .
The Guatemalan radio station Emisoras Unidas reported exchanging text messages with Perez Molina . Asked whether he planned to resign , he wrote : `` I will face whatever is necessary to face , and what the law requires . '' Some protesters demanded the general election be postponed , both because of the crisis and because it was plagued with accusations of irregularities . Others warned that suspending the vote could lead to an institutional vacuum . However , on 2 September 2015 Prez Molina resigned , a day after Congress impeached him . On 3 September 2015 he was summoned to the Justice Department for his first legal audience for the La Linea corruption case .
In June 2016 a United Nations-backed prosecutor described the administration of Prez Molina as a crime syndicate and outlined another corruption case , this one dubbed Cooperacha ( Kick-in ) . The head of the Social Security Institute and at least five other ministers pooled funds to buy him luxurious gifts such as motorboats , spending over $ 4.7 million in three years .
== Geography ==
Guatemala is mountainous with small patches of desert and sand dunes , all hilly valleys , except for the south coast and the vast northern lowlands of Petn ( department ) department . Two mountain chains enter Guatemala from west to east , dividing Guatemala into three major regions : the highlands , where the mountains are located ; the Pacific coast , south of the mountains and the Petn region , north of the mountains .
All major cities are located in the highlands and Pacific coast regions ; by comparison , Petn is sparsely populated . These three regions vary in climate , elevation , and landscape , providing dramatic contrasts between hot , humid tropical lowlands and colder , drier highland peaks . Volcn Tajumulco , at , is the highest point in the Central American countries .
The rivers are short and shallow in the Pacific drainage basin , larger and deeper in the Caribbean and the Gulf of Mexico drainage basins . These rivers include the Polochic River and Dulce River ( Guatemala ) , which drain into Lake Izabal , the Motagua River , the Sarstoon River , which forms the boundary with Belize , and the Usumacinta River , which forms the boundary between Petn and Chiapas , Mexico .
===Natural disasters===
Guatemala 's location between the Caribbean Sea and Pacific Ocean makes it a target for hurricanes such as Hurricane Mitch in 1998 and Hurricane Stan in October 2005 , which killed more than 1,500 people . The damage was not wind-related , but rather due to significant flooding and resulting mudflow . The most recent was Hurricane Eta in November 2020 , which was responsible for more than 100 missing or killed with the final tally still uncertain .
Guatemala 's highlands lie along the Motagua Fault , part of the boundary between the Caribbean Plate and North American Plate tectonic plates . This fault has been responsible for several major earthquakes in historic times , including a 7.5 magnitude tremor on 4 February 1976 which killed more than 25,000 people . In addition , the Middle America Trench , a major subduction zone lies off the Pacific coast . Here , the Cocos Plate is sinking beneath the Caribbean Plate , producing volcanic activity inland of the coast . Guatemala has 37 volcanoes , four of them active : Pacaya , Santiaguito , Volcn de Fuego , and Volcn Tacan .
Natural disasters have a long history in this geologically active part of the world . For example , two of the three Antigua Guatemala # History of the capital of Guatemala have been due to volcanic mudflows in 1541 and earthquakes in 1773.
=== Biodiversity ===
Guatemala has 14 ecoregions ranging from mangrove forests to both ocean littorals with 5 different ecosystems . Guatemala has 252 listed wetlands , including five lakes , 61 lagoons , 100 rivers , and four swamps . Tikal National Park was the first mixed UNESCO World Heritage Site . Guatemala is a country of distinct fauna . It has some 1246 known species . Of these , 6.7 % are endemism and 8.1 % are threatened . Guatemala is home to at least 8,682 species of vascular plants , of which 13.5 % are endemic . 5.4 % of Guatemala is protected under IUCN categories I-V.
The Maya Biosphere Reserve in the department of Petn ( department ) has 2,112,940 ha , making it the second-largest forest in Central America after Bosawas . It had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 3.85/10 , ranking it 138th globally out of 172 countries .
== Government ==
=== Political system ===
Guatemala is a constitutional democratic republic whereby the President of Guatemala is both [ of state ] and [ of government ] , and of a multi-party system . Executive power is exercised by the government . Legislative power is vested in both the government and the Congress of the Republic of Guatemala . The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature .
On 2 September 2015 , Otto Prez Molina resigned as President of Guatemala due to La Linea corruption case and was replaced by Alejandro Maldonado until January 2016 . Congress appointed former Universidad de San Carlos de Guatemala President Alfonso Fuentes Soria as the new vice president to replace Maldonado .
Jimmy Morales assumed office on 14 January 2016.
=== Foreign relations ===
Guatemala has long claimed all or part of the territory of neighboring Belize . Due to this territorial dispute , Guatemala did not recognize Belize 's independence until 6 September 1991 , but the dispute is not resolved . Negotiations are currently under way under the auspices of the Organization of American States to conclude it .
=== Military ===
Guatemala has a modest military , with between 15,000 and 20,000 personnel .
In 2017 , Guatemala signed the United Nations Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons .
=== Administrative divisions ===
Guatemala is divided into 22 Department ( subnational entity ) ( Spanish language : departamentos ) and sub-divided into about 335 municipalities ( Spanish language : municipios ) .
=== Human rights ===
Killings and death squads have been common in Guatemala since the end of the civil war in 1996 . They often had ties to Clandestine Security Apparatuses ( Cuerpos Ilegales y Aparatos Clandestinos de Seguridad  CIACS ) , organizations of current and former members of the military involved in organized crime . They had significant influence , now somewhat lessened , but extrajudicial killings continue . In July 2004 , the Inter-American Court condemned the 18 July 1982 massacre of 188 Achi-Maya in Plan de Sanchez , and for the first time in its history , ruled the Guatemalan Army had committed genocide . It was the first ruling by the court against the Guatemalan state for any of the 626 massacres reported in its 1980s scorched-earth campaign . In those massacres , 83 percent of the victims were Maya and 17 percent Ladino .
{ class= '' wikitable '' style= '' align : center ; ''
! colspan=2 Extra-Judicial Killings in Guatemala
-
style= '' text-align : center ; '' 2010
style= '' text-align : right ; '' 5,072
-
style= '' text-align : center ; '' 2011
style= '' text-align : right ; '' 279
-
style= '' text-align : center ; '' 2012
style= '' text-align : right ; '' 439
-
colspan=2 source : Center for Legal Action in Human Rights ( CALDH )
-
}
In 2008 , Guatemala became the first country to officially recognize femicide , the murder of a female because of her gender , as a crime . Guatemala has the third-highest femicide rate in the world , after El Salvador and Jamaica , with around 9.1 murders for every 100,000 women from 2007 to 2012.
== Economy ==
Guatemala is the largest economy in Central America , with a GDP ( PPP ) per capita of US $ 5,200 . However , Guatemala faces many social problems and is one of the poorest countries in Latin America . The income distribution is highly unequal with more than half of the population below the national poverty line and just over 400,000 ( 3.2 % ) unemployed . The CIA World Fact Book considers 54.0 % of the population of Guatemala to be living in poverty in 2009.
In 2010 , the Guatemalan economy grew by 3 % , recovering gradually from the 2009 crisis , as a result of the falling demands from the United States and other Central American markets and the slowdown in foreign investment in the middle of the Global recession of 2009.
Remittances from Guatemalans living in United States now constitute the largest single source of foreign income ( two-thirds of exports and one tenth of GDP ) .
Some of Guatemala 's main exports are fruits , vegetables , flowers , handicrafts , cloths and others . In the face of a rising demand for biofuels , the country is growing and exporting an increasing amount of raw materials for biofuel production , especially sugar cane and palm oil . Critics say that this development leads to higher prices for staple foods like corn , a major ingredient in the Guatemalan diet . As a consequence of the subsidization of US American corn , Guatemala imports nearly half of its corn from the United States that is using 40 percent of its crop harvest for biofuel production . In 2014 , the government was considering ways to legalize poppy and marijuana production , hoping to tax production and use tax revenues to fund drug prevention programs and other social projects .
Gross Domestic Product ( GDP ) in purchasing power parity ( PPP ) in 2010 was estimated at US $ 70.15 billion . The service sector is the largest component of GDP at 63 % , followed by the industry sector at 23.8 % and the agriculture sector at 13.2 % ( 2010 est. ) . Mines produce gold , silver , zinc , cobalt and nickel . The agricultural sector accounts for about two-fifths of exports , and half of the labor force . Organic coffee , sugar , textiles , fresh vegetables , and bananas are the country 's main exports . Inflation was 3.9 % in 2010.
The 1996 peace accords that ended the decades-long civil war removed a major obstacle to foreign investment . Tourism has become an increasing source of revenue for Guatemala thanks to the new foreign investment .
In March 2006 , Guatemala 's congress ratified the Dominican Republic-Central America Free Trade Agreement Dominican Republic ;  Central American Free Trade Agreement ( DR-CAFTA ) between several Central American nations and the United States . Guatemala also has free trade agreements with Taiwan and Colombia .
=== Tourism ===
Tourism has become one of the main drivers of the economy , with tourism estimated at $ 1.8 billion to the economy in 2008 . Guatemala receives around two million tourists annually . In recent years , there has been an increase in the number of cruise ships visiting Guatemalan seaports , leading to higher tourist numbers . Tourist destinations include Mayan archaeological sites ( e.g. , Tikal in the Peten , Quirigu in Izabal , Iximche in Tecpan Chimaltenango and Guatemala City ) , natural attractions ( e.g. , Lake Atitln and Semuc Champey ) and historical sites such as the colonial city of Antigua Guatemala , which is recognized as a UNESCO Cultural Heritage site .
== Society ==
=== Demographics ===
Guatemala has a population of ( est ) . With only 885,000 in 1900 , this constitutes the fastest population growth in the Western Hemisphere during the 20th century . The Republic of Guatemala 's first census was taken in 1778 , and despite the fact that these censuses have been fairly accurate , they have not been taken at regular intervals . The 1940 census was burned . Data from the remaining censuses is in the Historical Population table below .
Guatemala is heavily centralized : transportation , communications , business , politics , and the most relevant urban activity takes place in the capital of Guatemala City , whose urban area has a population of almost 3 million .
The estimated median age in Guatemala is 20 years old , 19.4 for males and 20.7 years for females . Guatemala is demographically one of the Youth in Guatemala countries in the Western Hemisphere , comparable to most of central Africa and Iraq . The proportion of the population below the age of 15 in 2010 was 41.5 % , 54.1 % were aged between 15 and 65 years of age , and 4.4 % were aged 65 years or older .
===Diaspora===
A significant number of Guatemalans live outside of their country . The majority of the Guatemalan diaspora is located in the United States of America , with estimates ranging from 480,665 to 1,489,426 . The difficulty in getting accurate counts for Guatemalans abroad is because many of them are refugee claimants awaiting determination of their status . Emigration to the United States of America has led to the growth of Guatemalan communities in California , Delaware , Florida , Illinois , New York , New Jersey , Texas , Rhode Island and elsewhere since the 1970s . However , as of July 2019 , the United States and Guatemala signed a deal to restrict migration and asylum seekers from Guatemala .
Below are estimates of the number of Guatemalans living abroad for certain countries :
=== Ethnic groups ===
Guatemala is populated by a variety of ethnic , cultural , racial , and linguistic groups . According to the 2018 Census conducted by the National Institute of Statistics ( Guatemala ) National Institute of Statistics ( INE ) , 56 % of the population is Ladino people reflecting mixed indigenous and European heritage . Indigenous Guatemalans are 43.6 % of the national population , which is one of the largest percentages in Latin America , behind only Peru and Bolivia . Most indigenous Guatemalans ( 41.7 % of the national population ) are of the Maya people , namely K'iche ' people K'iche ' ( 11.0 % of the total population ) , Q'eqchi ' people Q'eqchi ( 8.3 % ) , Kaqchikel people ( 7.8 % ) , Mam people ( 5.2 % ) , and `` other Maya peoples '' ( 7.6 % ) . 2 % of the national population is indigenous non-Maya . 1.8 % of the population is Xinca ( mesoamerican ) , and 0.1 % of the population is Garifuna ( African/Carib mix ) .
White people Guatemalans of European descent , also called Criollo people , are not differentiated from Ladinos ( mixed-race ) individuals in the Guatemalan census . Most are descendants of German and Spanish settlers , and others derive from Italians , British , French , Swiss , Belgians , Dutch , Russians and Danish . German settlers are credited with bringing the tradition of Christmas trees to Guatemala .
The population includes about 110,000 Salvadorans . The Garfuna , descended primarily from Black Africans who lived and intermarried with indigenous peoples from St. Vincent , live mainly in Livingston ( Guatemala ) and Puerto Barrios . Afro-Guatemalans and mulattos descended primarily from banana plantation workers . There are also Asian people , mostly of Han Chinese descent but also Arab people of Lebanese people and Syrian people descent . A growing Koreans community in Guatemala City and in nearby Mixco , numbers about 50,000.
=== Languages ===
Guatemala 's sole official language is Spanish , spoken by 93 percent of the population as either the first or second language .
Twenty-one Mayan languages are spoken , especially in rural areas , as well as two non-Mayan Amerindian languages : Xinca language , which is indigenous to the country , and Garifuna language , an Arawakan language spoken on the Caribbean coast . According to the Language Law of 2003 , these languages are recognized as national languages .
There are also significant numbers of German language , Chinese language , French language and English language speakers .
=== Indigenous integration and bilingual education ===
Throughout the 20th century there have been many developments in the integration of Mayan languages into the Guatemalan society and educational system . Originating from political reasons , these processes have aided the revival of some Mayan languages and advanced bilingual education in the country .
In 1945 , in order to overcome `` the Indian problem '' , the Guatemalan government founded The Institute Indigents ta National ( NH ) , the purpose of which was to teach literacy to Mayan children in their mother tongue instead of Spanish , to prepare the ground for later assimilation of the latter . The teaching of literacy in the first language , which received support from the UN , significantly advanced in 1952 , when the SIL ( Summer Institute of Linguistics ) , located in Dallas , Texas , partnered with the Guatemalan Ministry of Education ; within 2 years , numerous written works in Mayan languages had been printed and published , and vast advancement was done in the translation of the New Testament . Further efforts to integrate the indigenous into the Ladino society were made in the following years , including the invention of a special alphabet to assist Mayan students transition to Spanish , and bilingual education in the Q'eqchi ' area . When Spanish became the official language of Guatemala in 1965 , the government started several programs , such as the Bilingual Castellanizacin Program and the Radiophonic Schools , to accelerate the move of Mayan students to Spanish . Unintentionally , the efforts to integrate the indigenous using language , especially the new alphabet , gave institutions tools to use Mayan tongues in schools , and while improving Mayan children 's learning , they left them unequipped to learn in a solely Spanish environment . So , an additional expansion of bilingual education took place in 1980 , when an experimental program in which children were to be instructed in their mother tongue until they are fluent enough in Spanish was created . The program proved successful when the students of the pilot showed higher academic achievements than the ones in the Spanish-only control schools . In 1987 , when the pilot was to finish , bilingual education was made official in Guatemala .
=== Largest cities ===
=== Religion ===
Christianity continues to remain strong and vital for the life of Demographics of Guatemala , but its composition has changed over generations of social and political unrest . Roman Catholicism , introduced by the Spanish during the colonial era , remains the largest denomination or church , accounting for 48.4 % of the population . Protestants , most of them Evangelicalism ( most Protestants are called Evangelicos in Latin America ) in a wide number of different denominations , made up 33.7 % of the population at that time , followed by 1.6 % in other religions ( such as Jews in Guatemala , Islam in Guatemala , and Buddhism ) , and 16.1 % claiming no religious affiliation . A more recent 2012 survey reveals Catholics at 47.6 % , Protestants at 38.2 % , other religions at 2.6 % , and the non-religious at 11.6 % .
Since the 1970s , and particularly since the 1990s , Guatemala has experienced the rapid growth of Evangelical Protestantism , whose adherents currently form more than 38 % of the population , and still growing , in different denominations .
Over the past two decades , particularly since the end of the civil war , Guatemala has seen heightened missionary activity . Protestant denominations have grown markedly in recent decades , chiefly Evangelicalism and Pentecostal varieties ; growth is particularly strong among the ethnic Maya population , with the National Evangelical Presbyterian Church of Guatemala maintaining 11 indigenous-language presbyteries . The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has grown from 40,000 members in 1984 to 164,000 in 1998 , and continues to expand .
The growth of Eastern Orthodoxy in Guatemala has been especially strong , with hundreds of thousands of converts in the last five years , giving the country the highest proportion of Orthodox adherents in the Western Hemisphere .
Traditional Maya religion persists through the process of inculturation , in which certain practices are incorporated into Catholic ceremonies and worship when they are sympathetic to the meaning of Catholic belief . Indigenous religious practices are increasing as a result of the cultural protections established under the peace accords . The government has instituted a policy of providing altars at every Maya ruin to facilitate traditional ceremonies .
Between 1990 and 2012 , the PROLADES Corporation made a study of public opinion polls in Guatemala . Its data reveal a relative decline in Catholicism and significant growth of denominations within Evangelical Protestantism , people adhering to no religion , and minority faiths ( including indigenous traditions ) . In 2018 , Catholics and Evangelical Protestants found common cause against abortion , in a rare public demonstration of unity .
* Including Judaism , Islam , Mayan religion , etc .
* * Including other religions and None/NA .
=== Immigration ===
During the colonial era Guatemala received immigrants ( settlers ) only from Spain . Subsequently , Guatemala received waves of immigration from Europe in the mid 19th century and early 20th century . Primarily from Germany , these immigrants installed coffee and cardamom fincas in Alta Verapaz , Zacapa , Quetzaltenango , Baja Verapaz and Izabal Department . To a lesser extent people also arrived from Spain , France , Belgium , England , Italy , Sweden , etc .
Many European immigrants to Guatemala were politicians , refugees , and entrepreneurs as well as families looking to settle . Up to 1950 Guatemala was the Central American country that received the most immigrants , behind Costa Rica , and large numbers of immigrants are still received today .
Since the 1890s there have been small communities of Asians ( in particular from Korea , China , Japan , Singapore , and the Philippines ) but in recent decades this has been growing . Also , beginning with the First World War , the immigrant population is being strengthened by Jewish immigration .
During the second half of the twentieth century , Latin American immigration grew in Guatemala , particularly from other Central American countries , Mexico , Cuba , and Argentina , although most of these immigrants stayed only temporarily before going to their final destinations in the United States .
=== Health ===
Guatemala has among the worst health outcomes in Latin America with some of the highest infant mortality rates , and one of the lowest life expectancies at birth in the region . With about 16,000 doctors for its 16 million people , Guatemala has about half the doctor-citizen ratio recommended by the World Health Organization WHO ] . Since the end of the [ [ Guatemalan Civil War in 1997 , the Ministry of Health has extended healthcare access to 54 % of the rural population .
Healthcare has received different levels of support from different political administrations who disagree on how best to manage distribution of services  via a private or a public entity  and the scale of financing that should be made available . , the Ministry of Health lacked the financial means to monitor or evaluate its programs .
Total healthcare spending , both public and private , has remained constant at between 6.4 and 7.3 % of the GDP . Per-capita average annual healthcare spending was only $ 368 in 2012 . Guatemalan patients choose between indigenous treatments or Western medicine when they engage with the health system .
=== Education ===
74.5 % of the population aged 15 and over is literate , the lowest literacy rate in Central America . Guatemala has a plan to increase literacy over the next 20 years .
The government runs a number of public elementary and secondary-level schools , as youth in Guatemala do not fully participate in education . These schools are free , though the cost of uniforms , books , supplies , and transportation makes them less accessible to the poorer segments of society and significant numbers of poor children do not attend school . Many middle and upper-class children go to private schools . Guatemala has one public university ( USAC or Universidad de San Carlos de Guatemala ) , and fourteen private ones ( see List of universities in Guatemala ) . USAC was the first university in Guatemala and one of the first Universities of America .
Organizations such as Child Aid , Pueblo a Pueblo , and Common Hope , which train teachers in villages throughout the Central Highlands region , are working to improve educational outcomes for children . Lack of training for rural teachers is one of the key contributors to Guatemala 's low literacy rates .
== Culture ==
Guatemala City is home to many of the nation 's libraries and museums , including the National Archives , the National Library , and the Museum of Archeology and Ethnology , which has an extensive collection of Maya artifacts . It also boasts private museums such as the Ixchel Museum of Indigenous Textiles and Clothing and the Museo Popol Vuh , which focuses on Maya archaeology . Both these museums are housed on the Universidad Francisco Marroqun campus . Most of the 329 municipalities in the country have at least a small museum .
=== Art ===
Guatemala has produced many indigenous artists who follow centuries-old Pre-Columbian traditions . Reflecting Guatemala 's colonial and post-colonial history , encounters with multiple global art movements also have produced a wealth of artists who have combined the traditional Primitivism or Nave art with European , North American , and other traditions .
The Escuela Nacional de Artes Plsticas `` Rafael Rodrguez Padilla '' is Guatemala 's leading art school , and several leading indigenous artists , also graduates of that school , have work in the permanent collection of the Museo Nacional de Arte Moderno `` Carlos Mrida '' in the capital city . Contemporary Guatemalan artists who have gained reputations outside of Guatemala include Dagoberto Vsquez , Luis Rolando Ixquiac Xicara , Carlos Mrida , Anbal Lpez , Roberto Gonzlez Goyri , and Elmar Rojas .
=== Literature ===
* The Guatemala National Prize in Literature is a one-time-only award that recognizes an individual writer 's body of work . It has been given annually since 1988 by the Ministry of Culture and Sports .
* Miguel ngel Asturias won the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1967 . Among his famous books is El Seor Presidente , a novel based on the government of Manuel Estrada Cabrera .
* Rigoberta Mench , winner of the Nobel Peace Prize for fighting oppression of indigenous people in Guatemala , is famous for her books I , Rigoberta Mench and Crossing Borders .
===Cinema===
The Guatemalan director Jayro Bustamante has gained an international audience with his films focused on Guatemalan contemporary society and politics : Ixcanul in 2015 , and Temblores and La Llorona ( The Weeping Woman ) in 2019.
=== Media and news ===
Major national newspapers in Guatemala include Prensa Libre ( Guatemala ) , El Peridico ( Guatemala ) and Siglo Veintiuno . The Guatemala Times is a digital English news magazine . Guatemala also has a few major local channels and radio stations , such as one of Guatemala 's major radio stations , Emisoras Unidas .
=== Music ===
Guatemalan music comprises a number of styles and expressions . Guatemalan social change has been empowered by music such as nueva cancion , which blends together histories , present-day issues , and the political values and struggles of common people . The Maya civilization had an intense musical practice , as documented by their iconography . Guatemala was also one of the first regions in the New World to be introduced to European music , from 1524 on . Many composers from the Renaissance , baroque , classical , romantic , and contemporary music styles have contributed works of all genres . The marimba , which is like a wooden xylophone , is the national instrument and its music is widely found in Guatemala . It has developed a large repertoire of very attractive pieces that have been popular for more than a century .
The Historia General de Guatemala has published a series of CDs compiling the historical music of Guatemala , in which every style is represented , from the Maya , colonial , independent and republican eras to the present . Many contemporary music groups in Guatemala play Caribbean music , Salsa music , Garifuna music-influenced punta , Latin pop , Music of Mexico , and mariachi .
=== Cuisine ===
Many traditional foods in Guatemalan cuisine are based on Mayan cuisine and prominently feature maize , Chili pepper and Black turtle bean as key ingredients . Traditional dishes also include a variety of stews including Kak'ik ( Kak-ik ) , which is a tomato-based stew with Turkey ( bird ) , pepian , and cocido . Guatemala is also known for its Mexican street food , which include small tamales called chuchitos , fried Cooking banana , and Tostada ( tortilla ) with tomato sauce , guacamole or black beans . Certain foods are also commonly eaten on certain days of the week ; for example , a popular custom is to eat paches ( a kind of tamale made from potatoes ) on Thursday . Certain dishes are also associated with special occasions , such as fiambre for All Saints ' Day on 1 November , or tamales and ponche ( Punch ( drink ) ) , which are both very common around Christmas .
=== Sports ===
==== Football ====
Association football is the most popular sport in Guatemala and its Guatemala national football team has appeared in 18 editions of the CONCACAF Championship , winning it once , in 1967 CONCACAF Championship . However , the team has failed to qualify to a FIFA World Cup so far . Established in 1919 , the National Football Federation of Guatemala organizes the country 's Liga Nacional de Ftbol de Guatemala and its lower-level competitions .
==== Futsal ====
Futsal is probably the most successful team sport in Guatemala . Its Guatemala national futsal team won the 2008 CONCACAF Futsal Championship as hosts . It was also the runner-up in 2012 CONCACAF Futsal Championship as hosts and won the bronze medal in 2016 CONCACAF Futsal Championship .
Guatemala participated for the first time in the FIFA Futsal World Cup in 2000 FIFA Futsal World Cup , as hosts , and has played in every competition from 2008 FIFA Futsal World Cup onwards . It has never passed the first round . It has also participated in every Grand Prix de Futsal since 2009 Grand Prix de Futsal , reaching the semifinals in 2014 Grand Prix de Futsal .
==== Olympics ====
The Guatemalan Olympic Committee was founded in 1947 and recognized by the International Olympic Committee that same year . Guatemala participated in the Guatemala at the 1952 Summer Olympics , and in every edition since the Guatemala at the 1968 Summer Olympics . It has also appeared in a single Winter Olympics edition , in Guatemala at the 1988 Winter Olympics .
Erick Barrondo won the only Olympic medal for Guatemala so far , silver in Athletics at the 2012 Summer Olympics  Men 's 20 kilometres walk at the Guatemala at the 2012 Summer Olympics .
==== Other sports ====
Guatemala also keeps National sports teams of Guatemala in several disciplines .
== See also ==
* Index of Guatemala-related articles
* Outline of Guatemala
== References ==
== Bibliography ==
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
== Further reading ==
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
== External links ==
* Guatemala After the War 19962000 , Photographs by Jorge Uzon
* Guatemala Map Search with Longitude and Latitude
* Guatemala ;  Country Article Encyclopdia Britannica
* Government of Guatemala
* Chief of State and Cabinet Members
* Guatemala . The World Factbook . Central Intelligence Agency .
* Guatemala at UCB Libraries GovPubs .
*
* Guatemala profile from the BBC News .
*
* Key Development Forecasts for Guatemala from International Futures .
* The National Security Archive : Guatemala Project
* Guatemala Tourism Commission
* World Bank Summary Trade Statistics Guatemala
Category : Guatemala
Category : Countries in Central America
Category : Former Spanish colonies
Category : Member states of the United Nations
Category : Republics
Category : Spanish-speaking countries and territories
Category : States and territories established in 1821
Category:1821 establishments in North America
Category : Countries in North America
Category : Northern Triangle of Central America <article_end> <article_start>  
Norway ( ; ; Norga ; Vuodna ; Vuodna ; Nrje ) , officially the Kingdom of Norway , is a Nordic countries in Northern Europe whose mainland territory comprises the western and northernmost portion of the Scandinavian Peninsula . The remote Arctic island of Jan Mayen and the archipelago of Svalbard also form part of Norway . Bouvet Island , located in the Subantarctic , is a dependency of Norway ; it also territorial claims in Antarctica to the Antarctic territories of Peter I Island and Queen Maud Land .
Norway has a total area of and a population of 5,385,300 as of November 2020 . The country shares a long eastern border with Sweden ( List of countries and territories by land borders 1,619 km or 1,006 ; mi long ) . Norway is bordered by Finland and Russia to the north-east , and the Skagerrak strait to the south , with Denmark on the other side . Norway has an extensive coastline , facing the North Atlantic Ocean and the Barents Sea . The maritime influence also dominates Norway 's climate with mild lowland temperatures on the sea coasts , whereas the interior , while colder , is also a lot milder than areas elsewhere in the world on such northerly latitudes . Even during polar night in the north , temperatures above freezing are commonplace on the coastline . The maritime influence brings high rainfall and snowfall to some areas of the country .
Harald V of Norway of the House of Glcksburg is the current King of Norway . Erna Solberg has been prime minister since 2013 when she replaced Jens Stoltenberg . As a unitary state sovereign state with a constitutional monarchy , Norway separation of powers between the Storting , the Cabinet of Norway and the Supreme Court of Norway , as determined by the Constitution of Norway . The kingdom was established in 872 as a merger of many petty kingdoms of Norway and has existed continuously for 1 , years . From 1537 to 1814 , Norway was a part of the Kingdom of DenmarkNorway , and from 1814 to 1905 , it was in a Union between Sweden and Norway with the Kingdom of Sweden . Norway was neutral during the World War I and remained so until April 1940 when the country was Operation Weserbung and German occupation of Norway by Germany until the end of World War II .
Norway has both administrative and political subdivisions on two levels : Counties of Norway and list of municipalities of Norway . The Smi people have a certain amount of self-determination and influence over traditional territories through the Smi Parliament of Norway and the Finnmark Act . Norway NorwayEuropean Union relations with both the European Union and the United States-Norway relations . Norway is also a founding member of the United Nations , NATO , the European Free Trade Association , the Council of Europe , the Antarctic Treaty System , and the Nordic Council ; a member of the European Economic Area , the World Trade Organization , and the OECD ; and a part of the Schengen Area . In addition , the Norwegian languages share mutual intelligibility with Danish language and Swedish language .
Norway maintains the Nordic model with universal health care and a comprehensive social security system , and its values are rooted in egalitarian ideals . The Norwegian state has large ownership positions in key industrial sectors , having extensive reserves of petroleum , natural gas , minerals , lumber , seafood , and fresh water . The petroleum industry accounts for around a quarter of the country 's gross domestic product ( GDP ) . On a per capita per-capita basis , Norway is the world 's largest producer of oil and natural gas outside of the Middle East .
The country has the list of countries by GDP ( PPP ) per capita fourth-highest per-capita income in the world on the World Bank and International Monetary Fund lists . On the Central Intelligence Agency 's GDP ( PPP ) per capita list ( 2015 estimate ) which includes autonomous territories and regions , Norway ranks as number eleven . It has the world 's largest sovereign wealth fund , with a value of US $ 1 ; trillion . Norway has had the highest Human Development Index ranking in the world since 2009 , a position also held previously between 2001 and 2006 ; it also has the highest List of countries by inequality-adjusted HDI inequality-adjusted ranking per 2018 . Norway ranked first on the World Happiness Report for 2017 and currently ranks first on the OECD Better Life Index , the Global Integrity , and the Democracy Index . Norway also has one of the lowest crime rates in the world .
== Etymology ==
Norway has two official names : Norge in Bokml and Noreg in Nynorsk . The English name Norway comes from the Old English word Norweg mentioned in 880 , meaning `` northern way '' or `` way leading to the north '' , which is how the Anglo-Saxons referred to the coastline of Atlantic Norway similar to leading theory about the origin of the Norwegian language name . The Anglo-Saxons of Britain also referred to the kingdom of Norway in 880 as Normanna land .
There is some disagreement about whether the native name of Norway originally had the same etymology as the English form . According to the traditional dominant view , the first component was originally : wikt : norr , a cognate of English north , so the full name was Norr wikt : vegr , `` the way northwards '' , referring to the sailing route along the Norwegian coast , and contrasting with survegar `` southern way '' ( from Old Norse : wikt : sur ) for ( Germany ) , and austrvegr `` eastern way '' ( from : wikt : austr ) for the Baltic Sea . In the translation of Orosius for Alfred , the name is Norweg , while in younger Old English sources the  is gone . In the 10th century many Norsemen settled in Northern France , according to the sagas , in the area that was later called Normandy from normann ( Norseman or Scandinavian ) , although not a Norwegian possession . In France normanni or northmanni referred to people of Norway , Sweden or Denmark . Until around 1800 , inhabitants of Western Norway were referred to as nordmenn ( northmen ) while inhabitants of Eastern Norway were referred to as austmenn ( eastmen ) .
According to another theory , the first component was a word nr , meaning `` narrow '' ( Old English nearu ) , referring to the inner-archipelago sailing route through the land ( `` narrow way '' ) . The interpretation as `` northern '' , as reflected in the English and Latin forms of the name , would then have been due to later folk etymology . This latter view originated with philologist Niels Halvorsen Trnnes in 1847 ; since 2016 it as also advocated by language student and activist Klaus Johan Myrvoll and was adopted by philology professor Michael Schulte ( professor ) . The form Nore is still used in placenames such as the village of Nore , Norway and lake Norefjorden in Buskerud county , and still has the same meaning . Among other arguments in favour of the theory , it is pointed out that the word has a long vowel in Skaldic poetry and is not attested with  in any native Norse texts or inscriptions ( the earliest runic attestations have the spellings nuruiak and nuriki ) . This resurrected theory has received some pushback by other scholars on various grounds , e. ; g. the uncontroversial presence of the element norr in the ethnonym norrmar `` Norseman , Norwegian person '' ( modern Norwegian nordmann ) , and the adjective norrnn `` northern , Norse , Norwegian '' , as well as the very early attestations of the Latin and Anglo-Saxon forms with
! .
In a Latin manuscript of 849 , the name Northuagia is mentioned , while a French chronicle of c. 900 uses the names Northwegia and Norwegia . When Ohthere of Hlogaland visited King Alfred the Great in England in the end of the ninth century , the land was called Norwegr ( lit . `` Northway '' ) and normanna land ( lit . `` Northmen 's land '' ) . According to Ohthere , Normanna lived along the Atlantic coast , the Danes around Skagerrak og Kattegat , while the Smi people ( the `` Fins '' ) had a nomadic lifestyle in the wide interior . Ohthere told Alfred that he was `` the most northern of all Norwegians '' , presumably at Senja island or closer to Troms . He also said that beyond the wide wilderness in Norway 's southern part was the land of the Swedes , `` Svealand '' .
The adjective Norwegian , recorded from c. 1600 , is derived from the Middle Latin of the name as Norwegia ; in the adjective Norwegian , the Old English spelling '-weg ' has survived .
After Norway had become Christian , Noregr and Noregi had become the most common forms , but during the 15th century , the newer forms Noreg ( h ) and Norg ( h ) e , found in medieval Icelandic manuscripts , took over and have survived until the modern day .
== History ==
=== Prehistory ===
The first inhabitants were the Ahrensburg culture ( 11th to 10th millennia BC ) , which was a late Upper Paleolithic culture during the Younger Dryas , the last period of cold at the end of the Weichselian glaciation . The culture is named after the village of Ahrensburg , north-east of Hamburg in the Schleswig-Holstein German state of Schleswig-Holstein , where wooden arrow shafts and clubs have been excavated . The earliest traces of human occupation in Norway are found along the coast , where the huge ice shelf of the Last glacial period first melted between 11,000 and 8,000 BC . The oldest finds are stone tools dating from 9,500 to 6,000 BC , discovered in Finnmark ( Komsa culture ) in the north and Rogaland ( Fosna-Hensbacka culture ) in the south-west . However , theories about two altogether different cultures ( the Komsa culture north of the Arctic Circle being one and the Fosna culture from Trndelag to Oslofjord being the other ) were rendered obsolete in the 1970s .
More recent finds along the entire coast revealed to archaeologists that the difference between the two can simply be ascribed to different types of tools and not to different cultures . Coastal fauna provided a means of livelihood for fishermen and hunters , who may have made their way along the southern coast about 10,000 BC when the interior was still covered with ice . It is now thought that these so-called `` Arctic '' peoples came from the south and followed the coast northward considerably later .
In the southern part of the country are dwelling sites dating from about 5,000 BC . Finds from these sites give a clearer idea of the life of the hunting and fishing peoples . The implements vary in shape and mostly are made of different kinds of stone ; those of later periods are more skilfully made . Rock carvings ( i.e . petroglyphs ) have been found , usually near hunting and fishing grounds . They represent game such as deer , reindeer , Moose , bears , birds , Earless seal , whales , and fish ( especially salmon and [ all of which were vital to the way of life of the coastal peoples . The rock carvings at Alta ] in Finnmark , the largest in Scandinavia , were made at sea level from 4,200 to 500 BC and mark the progression of the land as the sea rose after the last ice age ended .
=== Bronze Age ===
Between 3000 and 2500 BC , new settlers ( [ [ Corded Ware culture ) arrived in eastern Norway . They were Proto-Indo-Europeans Indo-European farmers who grew grain and kept cows and sheep . The hunting-fishing population of the west coast was also gradually replaced by farmers , though hunting and fishing remained useful secondary means of livelihood .
From about 1500 BC , bronze was gradually introduced , but the use of stone implements continued ; Norway had few riches to barter for bronze goods , and the few finds consist mostly of elaborate weapons and brooches that only chieftains could afford . Huge burial cairns built close to the sea as far north as Harstad and also inland in the south are characteristic of this period . The motifs of the rock carvings differ slightly from those typical of the Stone Age . Representations of the Sun , animals , trees , weapons , ships , and people are all strongly stylised .
Thousands of rock carvings from this period depict ships , and the large stone burial monuments known as stone ships , suggest that ships and seafaring played an important role in the culture at large . The depicted ships most likely represent sewn plank built canoes used for warfare , fishing and trade . These ship types may have their origin as far back as the neolithic period and they continue into the Pre-Roman Iron Age , as exemplified by the Hjortspring boat .
=== Iron Age ===
Little has been found dating from the early Iron Age ( the last 500 years BC ) . The dead were cremated , and their graves contain few burial goods . During the first four centuries AD , the people of Norway were in contact with Roman-occupied Gaul . About 70 Roman bronze cauldrons , often used as burial urns , have been found . Contact with the civilised countries farther south brought a knowledge of runes ; the oldest known Norwegian runic inscription dates from the 3rd century . At this time , the amount of settled area in the country increased , a development that can be traced by coordinated studies of topography , archaeology , and place-names . The oldest root names , such as nes , vik , and b ( `` cape , '' `` bay , '' and `` farm '' ) , are of great antiquity , dating perhaps from the Bronze Age , whereas the earliest of the groups of compound names with the suffixes vin ( `` meadow '' ) or heim ( `` settlement '' ) , as in Bjrgvin ( Bergen ) or Sheim ( Seim ) , usually date from the 1st century AD .
Archaeologists first made the decision to divide the Iron Age of Northern Europe into distinct pre-Roman and Roman Iron Ages after Emil Vedel unearthed a number of Iron Age artefacts in 1866 on the island of Bornholm . They did not exhibit the same permeating Roman influence seen in most other artefacts from the early centuries AD , indicating that parts of northern Europe had not yet come into contact with the Romans at the beginning of the Iron Age .
=== Migration period ===
The destruction of the Western Roman Empire by the Germanic peoples in the 5th century is characterised by rich finds , including tribal chiefs ' graves containing magnificent weapons and gold objects . Hill forts were built on precipitous rocks for defence . Excavation has revealed stone foundations of farmhouses longone even longthe roofs of which were supported on wooden posts . These houses were family homesteads where several generations lived together , with people and cattle under one roof .
These states were based on either clans or tribes ( e.g. , the Horder of Hordaland in western Norway ) . By the 9th century , each of these small states had Thing ( assembly ) ( local or regional assemblies ) for negotiating and settling disputes . The thing meeting places , each eventually with a [ ( open-air sanctuary ) or a heathen hof ] ( temple ; literally `` hill '' ) , were usually situated on the oldest and best farms , which belonged to the chieftains and wealthiest farmers . The regional things united to form even larger units : assemblies of deputy yeomen from several regions . In this way , the lagting ( assemblies for negotiations and lawmaking ) developed . The Gulating had its meeting place by [ [ Sognefjord and may have been the centre of an aristocratic confederation along the western fjords and islands called the Gulatingslag . The Frostating was the assembly for the leaders in the Trondheimsfjord area ; the Earls of Lade , near Trondheim , seem to have enlarged the Frostatingslag by adding the coastland from Romsdalsfjord to Lofoten .
=== Viking Age ===
From the 8th to the 10th century , the wider Scandinavian region was the source of Vikings . The looting of the monastery at Lindisfarne in Northeast England in 793 by North Germanic peoples has long been regarded as the event which marked the beginning of the Viking Age . This age was characterised by expansion and emigration by Viking seafarers . They colonised , raided , and traded in all parts of Europe . Norwegian Viking explorers discovered Iceland by accident in the 9th century when heading for the Faroe Islands , and eventually came across Vinland , known today as Newfoundland ( island ) , in Canada . The Vikings from Norway were most active in the northern and western British Isles and eastern North America isles .
According to tradition , Harald Fairhair unified them into one in 872 after the Battle of Hafrsfjord in Stavanger , thus becoming the first king of a united Norway . Harald 's realm was mainly a South Norwegian coastal state . Fairhair ruled with a strong hand and according to the sagas , many Norwegians left the country to live in Iceland , the Faroe Islands , Greenland , and parts of Great Britain and Ireland . The modern-day Irish cities of Dublin , Limerick and Waterford were founded by Norwegian settlers .
Norse mythology were replaced slowly by Christian mythology in the late 10th and early 11th centuries . One of the most important sources for the history of the 11th century Vikings is the treaty between the Icelanders and Olaf Haraldsson , king of Norway circa 1015 to 1028 . This is largely attributed to the missionary kings Olaf I of Norway and Olaf II of Norway St. Olav . Haakon I of Norway was Norway 's first Christian king , in the mid-10th century , though his attempt to introduce the religion was rejected . Born sometime in between 963 and 969 , Olav Tryggvasson set off raiding in England with 390 ships . He attacked London during this raiding . Arriving back in Norway in 995 , Olav landed in Moster ( island ) . There he built a church which became the first Old Moster Church ever built in Norway . From Moster , Olav sailed north to Trondheim where he was proclaimed King of Norway by the Eyrathing in 995.
Feudalism never really developed in Norway or Sweden , as it did in the rest of Europe . However , the administration of government took on a very conservative feudal character . The Hanseatic League forced the royalty to cede to them greater and greater concessions over foreign trade and the economy . The League had this hold over the royalty because of the loans the Hansa had made to the royalty and the large debt the kings were carrying . The League 's monopolistic control over the economy of Norway put pressure on all classes , especially the peasantry , to the degree that no real burgher ( title ) class existed in Norway .
=== Civil war and peak of power ===
From the 1040s to 1130 , the country was at peace . In 1130 , the civil war era in Norway broke out on the basis of line of succession to the Norwegian throne , which allowed all the king 's sons to rule jointly . For periods there could be peace , before a lesser son allied himself with a chieftain and started a new conflict . The Archdiocese of Nidaros was created in 1152 and attempted to control the appointment of kings . The church inevitably had to take sides in the conflicts , with the civil wars also becoming an issue regarding the church 's influence of the king . The wars ended in 1217 with the appointment of Hkon Hkonsson , who introduced clear law of succession .
From 1000 to 1300 , the population increased from 150,000 to 400,000 , resulting both in more land being cleared and the subdivision of farms . While in the Viking Age all farmers owned their own land , by 1300 , seventy percent of the land was owned by the king , the church , or the aristocracy . This was a gradual process which took place because of farmers borrowing money in poor times and not being able to repay . However , tenants always remained free men and the large distances and often scattered ownership meant that they enjoyed much more freedom than continental serfs . In the 13th century , about twenty percent of a farmer 's yield went to the king , church and landowners .
The 14th century is described as Norway 's Golden Age , with peace and increase in trade , especially with the British Islands , although Germany became increasingly important towards the end of the century . Throughout the High Middle Ages , the king established Norway as a sovereign state with a central administration and local representatives .
In 1349 , the Black Death spread to Norway and had within a year killed a third of the population . Later plagues reduced the population to half the starting point by 1400 . Many communities were entirely wiped out , resulting in an abundance of land , allowing farmers to switch to more animal husbandry . The reduction in taxes weakened the king 's position , and many aristocrats lost the basis for their surplus , reducing some to mere farmers . High tithes to church made it increasingly powerful and the archbishop became a member of the Norwegian Council of State .
The Hanseatic League took control over Norwegian trade during the 14th century and established a trading center in Bergen . In 1380 , Olaf II of Denmark inherited both the Norwegian and Danish thrones , creating a union between the two countries . In 1397 , under Margaret I of Denmark , the Kalmar Union was created between the three Scandinavian countries . She waged war against the Germans , resulting in a trade blockade and higher taxation on Norwegian goods , which resulted in Engelbrekt rebellion . However , the Norwegian Council of State was too weak to pull out of the union .
Margaret pursued a centralising policy which inevitably favoured Denmark , because it had a greater population than Norway and Sweden combined . Margaret also granted trade privileges to the Hanseatic merchants of Lbeck in Bergen in return for recognition of her right to rule , and these hurt the Norwegian economy . The Hanseatic merchants formed a state within a state in Bergen for generations . Even worse were the pirates , the `` Victual Brothers '' , who launched three devastating raids on the port ( the last in 1427 ) .
Norway slipped ever more to the background under the House of Oldenburg ( established 1448 ) . There was one revolt under Knut Alvsson in 1502 . Norwegians had some affection for Christian II of Denmark , who resided in the country for several years . Norway took no part in the events which led to Swedish independence from Denmark in the 1520s .
=== Kalmar Union ===
Upon the death of Haakon V of Norway ( King of Norway ) in 1319 , Magnus IV of Sweden , at just three years old , inherited the throne as King Magnus VII of Norway . At the same time , a movement to make Magnus King of Sweden proved successful , and both the kings of Sweden and of Denmark were elected to the throne by their respective nobles , Thus , with his election to the throne of Sweden , both Sweden and Norway were united under King Magnus VII .
In 1349 , the Black Death radically altered Norway , killing between 50 % and 60 % of its population and leaving it in a period of social and economic decline . The plague left Norway very poor . Although the death rate was comparable with the rest of Europe , economic recovery took much longer because of the small , scattered population . Even before the plague , the population was only about 500,000 . After the plague , many farms lay idle while the population slowly increased . However , the few surviving farms ' tenants found their bargaining positions with their landlords greatly strengthened .
King Magnus VII ruled Norway until 1350 , when his son , Haakon , was placed on the throne as Haakon VI of Norway . In 1363 , Haakon VI married Margaret I of Denmark , the daughter of King Valdemar IV of Denmark . Upon the death of Haakon VI , in 1379 , his son , Olaf II of Denmark , was only 10 years old . Olaf had already been elected to the throne of Denmark on 3 May 1376 . Thus , upon Olaf 's accession to the throne of Norway , Denmark and Norway entered personal union . Olaf 's mother and Haakon 's widow , Queen Margaret , managed the foreign affairs of Denmark and Norway during the minority of Olaf IV .
Margaret was working toward a union of Sweden with Denmark and Norway by having Olaf elected to the Swedish throne . She was on the verge of achieving this goal when Olaf IV suddenly died . However , Denmark made Margaret temporary ruler upon the death of Olaf . On 2 February 1388 , Norway followed suit and crowned Margaret . Queen Margaret knew that her power would be more secure if she were able to find a king to rule in her place . She settled on Eric of Pomerania , grandson of her sister . Thus at an all-Scandinavian meeting held at Kalmar , Erik of Pomerania was crowned king of all three Scandinavian countries . Thus , royal politics resulted in personal unions between the Nordic countries , eventually bringing the thrones of Norway , Denmark , and Sweden under the control of Queen Margaret when the country entered into the Kalmar Union .
=== Union with Denmark ===
After Sweden broke out of the Kalmar Union in 1521 , Norway tried to follow suit , but the subsequent rebellion was defeated , and Norway remained in a union with Denmark until 1814 , a total of 434 years . During the Romantic nationalism of the 19th century , this period was Nicolai Wergeland referred to as the `` 400-Year Night '' , since all of the kingdom 's royal , intellectual , and administrative power was centred in Copenhagen in Denmark . In fact , it was a period of great prosperity and progress for Norway , especially in terms of shipping and foreign trade , and it also secured the country 's revival from the demographic catastrophe it suffered in the Black Death . Based on the respective natural resources , DenmarkNorway was in fact a very good match since Denmark supported Norway 's needs for grain and food supplies , and Norway supplied Denmark with timber , metal , and fish .
With the Reformation in DenmarkNorway and Holstein in 1536 , the archbishopric in Trondheim was dissolved , and Norway lost its independence , and effectually became a colony of Denmark . The Church 's incomes and possessions were instead redirected to the court in Copenhagen . Norway lost the steady stream of pilgrims to the relics of Olaf II of Norway St. Olav at the Nidaros shrine , and with them , much of the contact with cultural and economic life in the rest of Europe .
Eventually restored as a kingdom ( albeit in legislative union with Denmark ) in 1661 , Norway saw its land area decrease in the 17th century with the loss of the provinces Bohusln , Jmtland , and Hrjedalen to Sweden , as the result of a number of disastrous wars with Sweden . In the north , however , its territory was increased by the acquisition of the northern provinces of Troms and Finnmark , at the expense of Sweden and Russia .
The Great Famine of 16951697 famine of 16951696 killed roughly 10 % of Norway 's population . The harvest failed in Scandinavia at least nine times between 1740 and 1800 , with great loss of life .
=== Union with Sweden ===
After DenmarkNorway was attacked by the United Kingdom at the 1807 Battle of Copenhagen ( 1807 ) , it entered into an alliance with Napoleon , with the war leading to dire conditions and mass starvation in 1812 . As the Danish kingdom found itself on the losing side in 1814 , it was forced , under terms of the Treaty of Kiel , to cede Norway to the king of Sweden , while the old Norwegian provinces of Iceland , Greenland , and the Faroe Islands remained with the Danish crown . Norway took this opportunity to declare independence , adopted a constitution based on United States Constitution and Constitution of France models , and elected the Crown Prince of Denmark and Norway , Christian VIII of Denmark , as king on 17 May 1814 . This is the famous Norwegian Constitution Day ( Seventeenth of May ) holiday celebrated by Norwegians and Norwegian-Americans alike . Syttende mai is also called Norwegian Constitution Day .
Norwegian opposition to the great powers ' decision to link Norway with Sweden caused the SwedishNorwegian War ( 1814 ) NorwegianSwedish War to break out as Sweden tried to subdue Norway by military means . As Sweden 's military was not strong enough to defeat the Norwegian forces outright , and Norway 's treasury was not large enough to support a protracted war , and as British and Russian navies blockaded the Norwegian coast , the belligerents were forced to negotiate the Convention of Moss . According to the terms of the convention , Christian Frederik abdicated the Norwegian throne and authorised the Parliament of Norway to make the necessary constitutional amendments to allow for the personal union that Norway was forced to accept . On 4 November 1814 , the Parliament ( Storting ) elected Charles XIII of Sweden as king of Norway , thereby establishing the Union between Sweden and Norway . Under this arrangement , Norway kept its liberal constitution and its own independent institutions , though it shared a common monarch and common foreign policy with Sweden . Following the recession caused by the Napoleonic Wars , economic development of Norway remained slow until economic growth began around 1830.
This period also saw the rise of the Norwegian romantic nationalism , as Norwegians sought to define and express a distinct national character . The movement covered all branches of culture , including literature ( Henrik Wergeland [ 18081845 ] , Bjrnstjerne Bjrnson [ 18321910 ] , Peter Christen Asbjrnsen [ 18121845 ] , Jrgen Moe [ 18131882 ] ) , painting ( Hans Gude [ 18251903 ] , Adolph Tidemand [ 18141876 ] ) , music ( Edvard Grieg [ 18431907 ] ) , and even language policy , where attempts to define a native written language for Norway led to today 's two official written forms for Norwegian : Bokml and Nynorsk .
Charles XIV John of Sweden , who came to the throne of Norway and Sweden in 1818 , was the second king following Norway 's break from Denmark and the union with Sweden . Charles John was a complex man whose long reign extended to 1844 . He protected the constitution and liberties of Norway and Sweden during the age of Klemens Wenzel , Prince von Metternich . As such , he was regarded as a liberal monarch for that age . However , he was ruthless in his use of paid informers , the secret police and restrictions on the freedom of the press to put down public movements for reformespecially the Norwegian national independence movement .
The Romanticism that followed the reign of King Charles III John brought some significant social and political reforms . In 1854 , women won the right to inherit property in their own right , just like men . In 1863 , the last trace of keeping unmarried women in the status of minors was removed . Furthermore , women were then eligible for different occupations , particularly the common school teacher . By mid-century , Norway 's democracy was limited by modern standards : Voting was limited to officials , property owners , leaseholders and burghers of incorporated towns .
Still , Norway remained a conservative society . Life in Norway ( especially economic life ) was `` dominated by the aristocracy of professional men who filled most of the important posts in the central government '' . There was no strong bourgeosie class in Norway to demand a breakdown of this aristocratic control of the economy . Thus , even while revolution swept over most of the countries of Europe in 1848 , Norway was largely unaffected by revolts that year .
Marcus Thrane was a Utopian socialist . He made his appeal to the labouring classes urging a change of social structure `` from below upwards . '' In 1848 , he organised a labour society in Drammen . In just a few months , this society had a membership of 500 and was publishing its own newspaper . Within two years , 300 societies had been organised all over Norway , with a total membership of 20,000 persons . The membership was drawn from the lower classes of both urban and rural areas ; for the first time these two groups felt they had a common cause . In the end , the revolt was easily crushed ; Thrane was captured and in 1855 , after four years in jail , was sentenced to three additional years for crimes against the safety of the state . Upon his release , Marcus Thrane attempted unsuccessfully to revitalise his movement , but after the death of his wife , he migrated to the United States .
In 1898 , all men were granted universal suffrage , followed by all Women 's suffrage in 1913.
=== Dissolution of the union ===
Christian Michelsen , a shipping magnate and statesman , and Prime Minister of Norway from 1905 to 1907 , played a central role in the peaceful separation of Norway from Sweden on 7 June 1905 . A national referendum confirmed the people 's preference for a monarchy over a republic . However , no Norwegian could legitimately claim the throne , since none of Norway 's noble families could claim descent from medieval royalty . In European tradition , Royal descent or `` blue '' blood is a precondition for laying claim to the throne .
The government then offered the throne of Norway to Prince Carl of Denmark , a prince of the Dano-German royal [ of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glcksburg ] and a distant relative of several of Norway 's medieval kings . After centuries of close ties between Norway and Denmark , a prince from the latter was the obvious choice for a European prince who could best relate to the Norwegian people . Following the plebiscite , he was unanimously elected king by the Norwegian Parliament of Norway , the first king of a fully independent Norway in 508 years ( 1397 : Kalmar Union ) ; he took the name Haakon VII of Norway . In 1905 , the country welcomed the prince from neighbouring Denmark , his wife Maud of Wales and their young son to re-establish Norway 's royal house .
=== First and Second World Wars ===
Throughout the First World War , Norway was in principle a neutral country . In reality , however , Norway had been pressured by the British to hand over increasingly large parts of its large merchant fleet to the British at low rates , as well as to join the trade blockade against Germany . Norwegian merchant marine ships , often with Norwegian sailors still on board , were then sailing under the British flag and at risk of being sunk by German submarines . Thus , many Norwegian sailors and ships were lost . Thereafter , the world ranking of the Norwegian merchant navy fell from fourth place to sixth in the world .
Norway also proclaimed its neutrality during the Second World War , but despite this , it was Operation Weserbung on 9 April 1940 . Although Norway was unprepared for the German surprise attack ( see : Battle of Drbak Sound , Norwegian Campaign , and Invasion of Norway ) , military and naval resistance lasted for two months . Norwegian armed forces in the north launched an offensive against the German forces in the Battles of Narvik , until they were forced to surrender on 10 June after losing British support which had been diverted to France during the Battle of France .
Haakon VII of Norway and the Norwegian government escaped to Rotherhithe in London . Throughout the war they sent inspirational radio speeches and supported clandestine military actions in Norway against the Germans . On the day of the invasion , the leader of the small National-Socialist party Nasjonal Samling , Vidkun Quisling , tried to seize power , but was forced by the German occupiers to step aside . Real power was wielded by the leader of the German occupation authority , Reichskommissar Josef Terboven . Quisling , as minister president , later formed a Quisling regime . Up to 15,000 Norwegians volunteered to fight in German units , including the Waffen-SS .
The fraction of the Norwegian population that supported Germany was traditionally smaller than in Sweden , but greater than is generally appreciated today . It included a number of prominent personalities such as the Nobel-prize winning novelist Knut Hamsun . The concept of a `` Germanic Union '' of member states fit well into their thoroughly nationalist-patriotic ideology .
Many Norwegians and persons of Norwegian descent joined the Allied forces as well as the Free Norwegian Forces . In June 1940 , a small group had left Norway following their king to Britain . This group included 13 ships , five aircraft , and 500 men from the Royal Norwegian Navy . By the end of the war , the force had grown to 58 ships and 7,500 men in service in the Royal Norwegian Navy , 5 squadrons of aircraft ( including Spitfires , Sunderland flying boats and Mosquitos ) in the newly formed Norwegian Air Force , and land forces including the Norwegian Independent Company 1 and 5 Troop as well as No . 10 British Commandos .
During the five years of German occupation of Norway , Norwegians built a Norwegian resistance movement which fought the German occupation forces with both civil disobedience and armed resistance including the destruction of Norsk Hydro 's [ water ] plant and stockpile of heavy water at Vemork , which crippled the German nuclear programme ( see : Norwegian heavy water sabotage ) . More important to the Allies of World War II war effort , however , was the role of the Norwegian Merchant Navy . At the time of the invasion , Norway had the fourth-largest merchant marine fleet in the world . It was led by the Norwegian shipping company Nortraship under the Allies throughout the war and took part in every war operation from the Dunkirk evacuation to the Normandy landings . Every December Norway gives a Christmas tree to the United Kingdom as thanks for the British assistance during the Second World War . A ceremony takes place to erect the tree in London 's Trafalgar Square . Svalbard was not occupied by German troops . Germany secretly Operation Haudegen in 1944 . The crew was stuck after the general capitulation in May 1945 and were rescued by a Norwegian seal hunter on 4 September . They surrendered to the seal hunter as the last German soldiers to surrender in WW2 .
=== Post-World War II history ===
From 1945 to 1962 , the Norwegian Labour Party held an absolute majority in the parliament . The government , led by prime minister Einar Gerhardsen , embarked on a program inspired by Keynesian economics , emphasising state financed industrialisation and co-operation between trade unions and employers ' organisations . Many measures of state control of the economy imposed during the war were continued , although the rationing of dairy products was lifted in 1949 , while price control and rationing of housing and cars continued until 1960.
The wartime alliance with the United Kingdom and the United States was continued in the post-war years . Although pursuing the goal of a socialist economy , the Labour Party distanced itself from the Communists ( especially after the Communists ' seizure of power in Czechoslovakia in 1948 ) , and strengthened its foreign policy and defence policy ties with the US . Norway received Marshall Plan aid from the United States starting in 1947 , joined the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development ( OECD ) one year later , and became a founding member of the NATO ( NATO ) in 1949.
The first oil was discovered at the small Balder field in 1967 , production only began in 1999 . In 1969 , the Phillips Petroleum Company discovered petroleum resources at the Ekofisk oil field field west of Norway . In 1973 , the Norwegian government founded the State oil company , Statoil . Oil production did not provide net income until the early 1980s because of the large capital investment that was required to establish the country 's petroleum industry . Around 1975 , both the proportion and absolute number of workers in industry peaked . Since then labour-intensive industries and services like factory mass production and shipping have largely been outsourced .
Norway was a founding member of the European Free Trade Association ( EFTA ) . Norway was twice invited to join the European Union , but ultimately declined to join after referendums that failed by narrow margins in 1972 Norwegian European Communities membership referendum and 1994 Norwegian European Union membership referendum .
In 1981 , a Conservative government led by Kre Willoch replaced the Labour Party with a policy of stimulating the stagflation with tax cuts , economic liberalisation , deregulation of markets , and measures to curb record-high inflation ( 13.6 % in 1981 ) .
Norway 's first female prime minister , Gro Harlem Brundtland of the Labour party , continued many of the reforms of her conservative predecessor , while backing traditional Labour concerns such as social security , high taxes , the industrialisation of nature , and feminism . By the late 1990s , Norway had paid off its foreign debt and had started accumulating a sovereign wealth fund . Since the 1990s , a divisive question in politics has been how much of the income from petroleum production the government should spend , and how much it should save .
In 2011 , Norway suffered 2011 Norway attacks on the same day conducted by Anders Behring Breivik which struck the Regjeringskvartalet in Oslo and a summer camp of the Labour party 's Workers ' Youth League ( Norway ) at Utya island , resulting in 77 deaths and 319 wounded .
The 2013 Norwegian parliamentary election brought a more conservative government to power , with the Conservative Party ( Norway ) and the Progress Party ( Norway ) winning 43 % of the electorate 's votes .
== Geography ==
Norway 's core territory comprises the western and northernmost portion of the Scandinavian Peninsula ; the remote island of Jan Mayen and the archipelago of Svalbard are also part of the Kingdom of Norway . The Antarctic Peter I Island and the sub-Antarctic Bouvet Island are Dependencies of Norway and thus not considered part of the Kingdom . Norway also lays claim to a section of Antarctica known as Queen Maud Land . From the Middle Ages to 1814 Norway was part of the DenmarkNorway . Norwegian possessions in the North Atlantic , Faroe Islands , Greenland , and Iceland , remained Danish when Norway was passed to Sweden at the Treaty of Kiel . Norway also comprised Bohusln until 1658 , Jmtland and Hrjedalen until 1645 , Shetland and Orkney until 1468 , and the Hebrides and Isle of Man until the Treaty of Perth in 1266.
Norway comprises the western and northernmost part of Scandinavia in Northern Europe . Norway lies between latitudes 57th parallel north 57 and 81st parallel north 81 N , and longitudes 4th meridian east 4 and 32nd meridian east 32 E. Norway is the northernmost of the Nordic countries and if Svalbard is included also the easternmost . Vard at 31 10 ' 07 '' east of Greenwich lies further east than St. Petersburg and Istanbul . Norway includes the northernmost point on the European mainland . The rugged coastline is broken by huge fjords and thousands of islands . The coastal Baseline ( sea ) is . The coastline of the mainland including fjords stretches , when islands are included the coastline has been estimated to . Norway shares a land border with Sweden , with Finland , and with Russia to the east . To the north , west and south , Norway is bordered by the Barents Sea , the Norwegian Sea , the North Sea , and Skagerrak . The Scandinavian Mountains form much of the border with Sweden .
At ( including Svalbard and Jan Mayen ) ( and without ) , much of the country is dominated by mountainous or high terrain , with a great variety of natural features caused by prehistoric glaciers and varied topography . The most noticeable of these are the fjords : deep grooves cut into the land flooded by the sea following the end of the Ice Age . Sognefjorden is the world 's second deepest fjord , and the world 's longest at . Hornindalsvatnet is the deepest lake in all Europe . Norway has about 400,000 lakes . There are 239,057 registered islands . Permafrost can be found all year in the higher mountain areas and in the interior of Finnmark county . List of glaciers in Norway are found in Norway .
The land is mostly made of hard granite and gneiss rock , but slate , sandstone , and limestone are also common , and the lowest elevations contain marine deposits . Because of the Gulf Stream and prevailing westerlies , Norway experiences higher temperatures and more precipitation than expected at such northern latitudes , especially along the coast . The mainland experiences four distinct seasons , with colder winters and less precipitation inland . The northernmost part has a mostly maritime Subarctic climate , while Svalbard has an Arctic tundra climate .
Because of the large latitudinal range of the country and the varied topography and climate , Norway has a larger number of different [ than almost any other European country . There are approximately 60,000 species in Norway and adjacent waters ( excluding bacteria and viruses ) . The Norwegian Shelf large marine ecosystem is considered highly productive .
=== Climate ===
The southern and western parts of Norway , fully exposed to Atlantic storm fronts , experience more precipitation and have milder winters than the eastern and far northern parts . Areas to the east of the coastal mountains are in a rain shadow ] , and have lower rain and snow totals than the west . The lowlands around Oslo have the warmest and sunniest summers , but also cold weather and snow in wintertime.Because of Norway 's high [ [ latitude , there are large seasonal variations in daylight . From late May to late July , the sun never completely descends beneath the horizon in areas north of the Arctic Circle ( hence Norway 's description as the `` Land of the Midnight sun '' ) , and the rest of the country experiences up to 20 hours of daylight per day . Conversely , from late November to late January , the sun never rises above the horizon in the north , and daylight hours are very short in the rest of the country .
The coastal climate of Norway is exceptionally mild compared with areas on similar latitudes elsewhere in the world , with the Gulf Stream passing directly offshore the northern areas of the Atlantic coast , continuously warming the region in the winter . Temperature anomalies found in coastal locations are exceptional , with Rst and Vry lacking a meteorological winter in spite of being north of the Arctic Circle . The Gulf Stream has this effect only on the northern parts of Norway , not in the south , despite what is commonly believed . The northern coast of Norway would thus be ice-covered if not for the Gulf Stream . As a side-effect , the Scandinavian Mountains prevent continental winds from reaching the coastline , causing very cool summers throughout Atlantic Norway . Oslo has more of a continental climate , similar to Sweden 's . The mountain ranges have subarctic and tundra climates . There is also very high rainfall in areas exposed to the Atlantic , such as Bergen . Oslo , in comparison , is dry , being in a rain shadow . Skjk in Oppland county is also in the rain shadow and is one of the driest places with precipitation annually . Finnmarksvidda and the interior valleys of Troms and Nordland also receive less than annually . Longyearbyen is the driest place in Norway with .
Parts of southeastern Norway including parts of Mjsa have warm-summer [ continental climate ] s ( Kppen climate classification Dfb ) , while the more southern and western coasts are mostly of the oceanic climate ( Cfb ) . Further inland in southeastern and northern Norway , the subarctic climate ( Dfc ) dominates ; this is especially true for areas in the rain shadow of the Scandinavian Mountains . Some of the inner valleys of Oppland get so little precipitation annually , thanks to the rain shadow effect , that they meet the requirements for dry-summer subarctic climates ( Dsc ) . In higher altitudes , close to the coasts of southern and western Norway , one can find the rare subpolar oceanic climate ( Cfc ) . This climate is also common in Northern Norway , usually in lower altitudes , all the way down to sea level . A small part of the northernmost coast of Norway has the Polar climate tundra/alpine/polar climate ( ET ) . Large parts of Norway are covered by mountains and high altitude plateaus , many of which also exhibit the Tundra climate tundra/alpine/polar climate ( ET ) .
=== Biodiversity ===
The total number of species include 16,000 species of insects ( probably 4,000 more species yet to be described ) , 20,000 species of algae , 1,800 species of lichen , 1,050 species of mosses , 2,800 species of vascular plants , up to 7,000 species of fungus , 450 species of birds ( 250 species nesting in Norway ) , 90 species of mammals , 45 fresh-water species of fish , 150 salt-water species of fish , 1,000 species of fresh-water invertebrates , and 3,500 species of salt-water invertebrates . About 40,000 of these species have been described by science . The IUCN Red List of 2010 encompasses 4,599 species . Norway contains five terrestrial ecoregions : Sarmatic mixed forests , Scandinavian coastal conifer forests , Scandinavian and Russian taiga , Kola Peninsula tundra , and Scandinavian montane birch forest and grasslands .
Seventeen species are listed mainly because they are endangered on a global scale , such as the Eurasian beaver , even if the population in Norway is not seen as endangered . The number of threatened and near-threatened species equals to 3,682 ; it includes 418 fungi species , many of which are closely associated with the small remaining areas of old-growth forests , 36 bird species , and 16 species of mammals . In 2010 , 2,398 species were listed as endangered or vulnerable ; of these were 1250 listed as vulnerable ( VU ) , 871 as endangered ( EN ) , and 276 species as critically endangered ( CR ) , among which were the grey wolf , the Arctic fox ( healthy population on Svalbard ) and the pool frog .
The largest predator in Norwegian waters is the sperm whale , and the largest fish is the basking shark . The largest predator on land is the polar bear , while the brown bear is the largest predator on the Norwegian mainland . The largest land animal on the mainland is the elk ( American English : moose ) . The elk in Norway is known for its size and strength and is often called skogens konge , `` king of the forest '' .
=== Environment ===
Attractive and dramatic scenery and landscape are found throughout Norway . The west coast of southern Norway and the coast of northern Norway present some of the most visually impressive coastal sceneries in the world . National Geographic Society has listed the Norwegian fjords as the world 's top tourist attraction . The country is also home to the natural phenomena of the Midnight sun ( during summer ) , as well as the Aurora known also as the Northern lights .
The 2016 Environmental Performance Index from Yale University , Columbia University and the World Economic Forum put Norway in seventeenth place , immediately below Croatia and Switzerland . The index is based on environmental risks to human health , habitat loss , and changes in CO2 emissions . The index notes over-exploitation of fisheries , but not Whaling in Norway Norway 's whaling or Energy in Norway . Norway had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 6.98/10 , ranking it 60th globally out of 172 countries .
== Politics and government ==
Norway is considered to be one of the most developed democracies and Rechtsstaat in the world . From 1814 , c. 45 % of men ( 25 years and older ) had the right to vote , whereas the United Kingdom had c. 20 % ( 1832 ) , Sweden c. 5 % ( 1866 ) , and Belgium c. 1.15 % ( 1840 ) . Since 2010 , Norway has been classified as the world 's most democratic country by the Democracy Index .
According to the Constitution of Norway , which was adopted on 17 May 1814 and inspired by the United States Declaration of Independence and French Revolution of 1776 and 1789 , respectively , Norway is a unitary state constitutional monarchy with a parliamentary system of government , wherein the Monarchy of Norway is the [ of state ] and the Prime Minister of Norway is the [ of government ] . Power is separated among the legislative , executive and judicial branches of government , as defined by the Constitution , which serves as the country 's supreme legal document .
The Norwegian Royal Family officially retains executive power . But following the introduction of a parliamentary system of government , the duties of the monarch have since become strictly representative and ceremonial , such as the formal appointment and dismissal of the Prime Minister and other ministers in the executive government . Accordingly , the Monarch is commander-in-chief of the Norwegian Armed Forces , and serves as chief diplomatic official abroad and as a symbol of unity . Harald V of Norway of the House of Glcksburg House of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glcksburg was crowned King of Norway in 1991 , the first since the 14th century who has been born in the country . Haakon , Crown Prince of Norway , is the legal and rightful heir to the throne and the Kingdom .
In practice , the Prime Minister exercises the executive powers . Constitutionally , legislative power is vested with both the government and the Parliament of Norway , but the latter is the supreme legislature and a unicameralism body . Norway is fundamentally structured as a representative democracy . The Parliament can pass a law by simple majority of the 169 representatives , who are elected on the basis of proportional representation from 19 constituencies for four-year terms .
150 are elected directly from the 19 constituencies , and an additional 19 seats ( `` levelling seats '' ) are allocated on a nationwide basis to make the representation in parliament correspond better with the popular vote for the political parties . A 4 % election threshold is required for a party to gain levelling seats in Parliament . There are a total of 169 members of parliament .
The Parliament of Norway , called the Parliament of Norway ( meaning Grand Assembly ) , ratifies national treaty developed by the executive branch . It can impeachment members of the government if their acts are declared unconstitutional . If an indicted suspect is impeached , Parliament has the power to remove the person from office .
The position of Prime Minister of Norway , Norway 's head of government , is allocated to the member of Parliament who can obtain the confidence of a majority in Parliament , usually the current leader of the largest political party or , more effectively , through a coalition of parties . A single party generally does not have sufficient political power in terms of the number of seats to form a government on its own . Norway has often been ruled by minority governments .
The prime minister nominates the cabinet , traditionally drawn from members of the same political party or parties in the Storting , making up the government . The PM organises the executive government and exercises its power as vested by the Constitution . Norway has a state church , the Lutheran Church of Norway , which has in recent years gradually been granted more internal autonomy in day-to-day affairs , but which still has a special constitutional status . Formerly , the PM had to have more than half the members of cabinet be members of the Church of Norway , meaning at least ten out of the 19 ministries . This rule was however removed in 2012 . The issue of separation of church and state in Norway has been increasingly controversial , as many people believe it is time to change this , to reflect the growing diversity in the population . A part of this is the evolution of the public school subject Christianity , a required subject since 1739 . Even the state 's loss in a battle at the European Court of Human Rights at Strasbourg in 2007 did not settle the matter . As of 1 January 2017 , the Church of Norway is a separate legal entity , and no longer a branch of the civil service .
Through the Norwegian Council of State , a privy council presided over by the monarch , the prime minister and the cabinet meet at the Royal Palace , Oslo and formally consult the Monarch . All government bills need the formal approval by the monarch before and after introduction to Parliament . The Council reviews and approves all of the monarch 's actions as head of state . Although all government and parliamentary acts are decided beforehand , the privy council is an example of symbolic gesture the king retains .
Members of the Storting are directly elected from party-list proportional representation party-lists proportional representation in nineteen plurality voting system plural-member constituencies in a national multi-party system . Historically , both the Norwegian Labour Party and Conservative Party ( Norway ) have played leading political roles . In the early 21st century , the Labour Party has been in power since the 2005 Norwegian parliamentary election , in a RedGreen Coalition with the Socialist Left Party ( Norway ) and the Centre Party ( Norway ) .
Since 2005 , both the Conservative Party and the Progress Party ( Norway ) have won numerous seats in the Parliament , but not sufficient in the 2009 Norwegian parliamentary election to overthrow the coalition . Commentators have pointed to the poor co-operation between the opposition parties , including the Liberal Party ( Norway ) and the Christian Democratic Party ( Norway ) . Jens Stoltenberg , the leader of the Labour Party , continued to have the necessary majority through his multi-party alliance to continue as PM until 2013.
In national elections in September 2013 , voters ended eight years of Labor rule . Two political parties , Hyre and Progress Party ( Norway ) , elected on promises of tax cuts , more spending on infrastructure and education , better services and stricter rules on immigration , formed a government . Coming at a time when Norway 's economy is in good condition with low unemployment , the rise of the right appeared to be based on other issues . Erna Solberg became prime minister , the second female prime minister after Gro Harlem Brundtland and the first conservative prime minister since Jan P. Syse . Solberg said her win was `` a historic election victory for the right-wing parties '' .
=== Administrative divisions ===
Norway , a unitary state , is divided into eleven first-level administrative county ( fylke ) . The counties are administered through directly elected county assemblies who elect the County Governor . Additionally , the Norwegian Royal Family and government are represented in every county by a County governor ( Norway ) , who effectively acts as a Governor . As such , the Government is directly represented at a local level through the County Governors ' offices . The counties are then sub-divided into 356 second-level municipalities ( kommuner ) , which in turn are administered by directly elected municipal council , headed by a mayor and a small executive cabinet . The capital of Oslo is considered both a county and a municipality .
Norway has two integral overseas territories : Jan Mayen and Svalbard , the only developed island in the archipelago of the same name , located miles away to the north . There are three Antarctica and Subantarctic dependent territory : Bouvet Island , Peter I Island , and Queen Maud Land . On most maps , there had been an unclaimed area between Queen Maud Land and the South Pole until 12 June 2015 when Norway formally annexed that area .
96 settlements have List of towns and cities in Norway status in Norway . In most cases , the city borders are coterminous with the borders of their respective municipalities . Often , Norwegian city municipalities include large areas that are not developed ; for example , Oslo municipality contains large forests , located north and south-east of the city , and over half of Bergen municipality consists of mountainous areas .
The counties of Norway are :
{ class= '' wikitable sortable ''
-
! scope= '' col '' Number
! scope= '' col '' County ( fylke )
! scope= '' col '' Administrative centre
! scope= '' col '' Most populous municipality
! scope= '' col '' Geographical region
! Total area
! Population
! Official language form
-
03
Oslo
Oslo
Eastern Norway
454 ; km2
673,469
Neutral
-
11
Stavanger
Stavanger
Western Norway
9,377 ; km2
473,526
Neutral
-
15
Molde
lesund
Western Norway
14,355 ; km2
266,856
Nynorsk
-
18
Bod
Bod
Northern Norway
38,154 ; km2
243,335
Neutral
-
30
Oslo , Drammen , Sarpsborg and Moss , Norway
Brum
Eastern Norway
24,592 ; km2
1,234,374
Neutral
-
34
Hamar
Ringsaker
Eastern Norway
52,072 ; km2
370,994
Neutral
-
38
Skien
Sandefjord
Eastern Norway
17,465 ; km2
415,777
Neutral
-
42
Kristiansand
Kristiansand
Southern Norway
16,434 ; km2
303,754
Neutral
-
46
Bergen
Bergen
Western Norway
33,870 ; km2
631,594
Nynorsk
-
50
Steinkjer
Trondheim
Trndelag
42,201 ; km2
458,744
Neutral
-
54
Troms
Troms
Northern Norway
74,829 ; km2
243,925
Neutral
}
=== Largest populated areas ===
=== Judicial system and law enforcement ===
Norway uses a civil law ( legal system ) where laws are created and amended in Parliament and the system regulated through the Courts of justice of Norway . It consists of the Supreme Court of Norway of 20 permanent judges and a Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Norway , appellate courts , city and Courts of justice of Norway # District courts , and conciliation councils . The judiciary is independent of executive and legislative branches . While the Prime Minister nominates Supreme Court Justices for office , their nomination must be approved by Parliament and formally confirmed by the Monarch in the Council of State . Usually , judges attached to regular courts are formally appointed by the Monarch on the advice of the Prime Minister .
The Courts ' strict and formal mission is to regulate the Norwegian judicial system , interpret the Constitution , and as such implement the legislation adopted by Parliament . In its judicial reviews , it monitors the legislative and executive branches to ensure that they comply with provisions of enacted legislation .
The Law enforcement in Norway by the Norwegian Police Service . It is a Unified National Police Service made up of 27 Police Districts and several specialist agencies , such as Norwegian National Authority for the Investigation and Prosecution of Economic and Environmental Crime , known as kokrim ; and the National Criminal Investigation Service ( Norway ) , known as Kripos , each headed by a chief of police . The Police Service is headed by the National Police Directorate , which reports to the Ministry of Justice and the Police . The Police Directorate is headed by a National Police Commissioner . The only exception is the Norwegian Police Security Service , whose head answers directly to the Ministry of Justice and the Police .
Norway abolished the death penalty for regular criminal acts in 1902 . The legislature abolished the death penalty for high treason in war and war-crimes in 1979 . Reporters Without Borders , in its 2007 Worldwide Press Freedom Index , ranked Norway at a shared first place ( along with Iceland ) out of 169 countries .
In general , the legal and institutional framework in Norway is characterised by a high degree of transparency , accountability and integrity , and the perception and the occurrence of corruption are very low . Norway has ratified all relevant international anti-corruption conventions , and its standards of implementation and enforcement of anti-corruption legislation are considered very high by many international anti-corruption working groups such as the OECD Anti-Bribery Working Group . However , there are some isolated cases showing that some municipalities have abused their position in public procurement processes .
Norwegian prisons are humane , rather than tough , with emphasis on rehabilitation . At 20 % , Norway 's re-conviction rate is among the lowest in the world .
=== Foreign relations ===
Norway maintains embassies in 82 countries . 60 countries maintain an embassy in Norway , all of them in the capital , Oslo .
Norway is a founding member of the United Nations ( UN ) , the NATO ( NATO ) , the Council of Europe and the European Free Trade Association ( EFTA ) . Norway issued applications for accession to the European Union ( EU ) and its predecessors in 1962 , 1967 and 1992 , respectively . While Denmark , Sweden and Finland obtained membership , the Norwegian electorate rejected the treaties of accession in referendums in 1972 Norwegian European Communities membership referendum and 1994 Norwegian European Union membership referendum .
After the 1994 referendum , Norway maintained its membership in the European Economic Area ( EEA ) , an arrangement granting the country access to the Single market of the European Union of the Union , on the condition that Norway implements the Union 's pieces of legislation which are deemed relevant ( of which there were approximately seven thousand by 2010 ) Successive Norwegian governments have , since 1994 , requested participation in parts of the EU 's co-operation that go beyond the provisions of the EEA agreement . Non-voting participation by Norway has been granted in , for instance , the Union 's Common Security and Defence Policy , the Schengen Agreement , and the European Defence Agency , as well as 19 separate programmes .
Norway participated in the 1990s brokering of the Oslo Accords , an unsuccessful attempt to resolve the IsraeliPalestinian conflict .
=== Military ===
The Norwegian Armed Forces numbers about 25,000 personnel , including civilian employees . According to 2009 mobilisation plans , full mobilisation produces approximately 83,000 combatant personnel . Norway has conscription ( including 612 months of training ) ; in 2013 , the country became the first in Europe and NATO to draft women as well as men . However , due to less need for conscripts after the Cold War ended with the break-up of the Soviet Union , few people have to serve if they are not motivated . The Armed Forces are subordinate to the Norwegian Ministry of Defence . The Commander-in-Chief is Harald V of Norway . The military of Norway is divided into the following branches : the Norwegian Army , the Royal Norwegian Navy , the Royal Norwegian Air Force , the Norwegian Cyber Defence Force and the Home Guard ( Norway ) .
In response to its being overrun by Germany in 1940 , the country was one of the founding nations of the NATO ( NATO ) on 4 April 1949 . At present , Norway contributes in the International Security Assistance Force ( ISAF ) in War in Afghanistan ( 2001present ) . Additionally , Norway has contributed in several missions in contexts of the United Nations , NATO , and the Common Security and Defence Policy of the European Union .
== Economy ==
Norwegians enjoy the second-highest List of countries by GDP ( nominal ) per capita GDP per-capita among European countries ( after Luxembourg ) , and the sixth-highest List of countries by GDP ( PPP ) per capita GDP ( PPP ) per-capita in the world . Today , Norway ranks as the second-wealthiest country in the world in monetary value , with the largest capital reserve per capita of any nation . According to the CIA World Factbook , Norway is a net external creditor of debt . Norway maintained first place in the world in the United Nations Development Programme Human Development Index ( HDI ) for six consecutive years ( 20012006 ) , and then reclaimed this position in 2009 . The standard of living in Norway is among the highest in the world . Foreign Policy magazine ranks Norway last in its List of countries by Failed States Index for 2009 , judging Norway to be the world 's most well-functioning and stable country . The OECD ranks Norway fourth in the 2013 equalised OECD Better Life Index and third in intergenerational earnings elasticity .
The Norwegian economy is an example of a mixed economy ; a prosperous capitalist welfare state it features a combination of free market activity and large state ownership in certain key sectors , influenced by both Liberal Party ( Norway ) governments from the late 19th century and later by Labour Party ( Norway ) governments in the postwar era . Healthcare in Norway is free ( after an annual charge of around 2000 Norwegian krone for those over 16 ) , and parents have 46 weeks paid parental leave . The state income derived from natural resources includes a significant contribution from petroleum production . Norway has an unemployment rate of 4.8 % , with 68 % of the population aged 1574 employed . People in the labour force are either employed or looking for work . 9.5 % of the population aged 1866 receive a disability pension and 30 % of the labour force are employed by the government , the highest in the OECD . The hourly productivity levels , as well as average hourly wages in Norway , are among the highest in the world .
The egalitarianism values of Norwegian society have kept the wage difference between the lowest paid worker and the CEO of most companies as much less than in comparable western economies . This is also evident in List of countries by income equality Norway 's low Gini coefficient .
The state has large ownership positions in key industrial sectors , such as the strategic petroleum sector ( Statoil ) , hydroelectric energy production ( Statkraft ) , aluminium production ( Norsk Hydro ) , the largest Norwegian bank ( DNB ASA ) , and telecommunication provider ( Telenor ) . Through these big companies , the government controls approximately 30 % of the stock values at the Oslo Stock Exchange . When non-listed companies are included , the state has even higher share in ownership ( mainly from direct oil licence ownership ) . Norway is a major shipping nation and has the world 's 6th largest Ship transport , with 1,412 Norwegian-owned merchant vessels .
By referendums in 1972 Norwegian European Communities membership referendum and 1994 Norwegian European Union membership referendum , Norwegians rejected proposals to join the European Union ( EU ) . However , Norway , together with Iceland and Liechtenstein , participates in the European Union 's single market through the European Economic Area ( EEA ) agreement . The EEA Treaty between the European Union countries and the EFTA countriestransposed into Norwegian law via `` ES-loven '' describes the procedures for implementing European Union rules in Norway and the other EFTA countries . Norway is a highly integrated member of most sectors of the EU internal market . Some sectors , such as agriculture , oil and fish , are not wholly covered by the EEA Treaty . Norway has also acceded to the Schengen Agreement and several other intergovernmental agreements among the EU member states .
The country is richly endowed with natural resources including petroleum , [ fish , forestry forests ] , and minerals . Large reserves of petroleum and natural gas were discovered in the 1960s , which led to a boom in the economy . Norway has obtained one of the highest standards of living in the world in part by having a large amount of natural resources compared to the size of the population . In 2011 , 28 % of state revenues were generated from the petroleum industry .
Norway is the first country which banned cutting of trees ( deforestation ) , in order to prevent rain forests from vanishing . The country declared its intention at the UN Climate Summit in 2014 , alongside Great Britain and Germany . Crops , that are typically linked to forests ' destruction are timber , soy , palm oil and beef . Now Norway has to find a new way to provide these essential products without exerting negative influence on its environment .
=== Resources ===
; Oil industry
Export revenues from oil and gas have risen to over 40 % of total exports and constitute almost 20 % of the GDP . Norway is the fifth-largest oil exporter and third-largest gas exporter in the world , but it is not a member of [ [ OPEC . In 1995 , the Norwegian government established the sovereign wealth fund ( The Government Pension Fund of Norway `` Government Pension Fund  Global '' ) , which would be funded with oil revenues , including taxes , dividends , sales revenues and licensing fees . This was intended to reduce overheating in the economy from oil revenues , minimise uncertainty from volatility in oil price , and provide a cushion to compensate for expenses associated with the ageing of the population .
The government controls its petroleum resources through a combination of state ownership in major operators in the oil fields ( with approximately 62 % ownership in Statoil in 2007 ) and the fully state-owned Petoro , which has a market value of about twice Statoil , and State 's Direct Financial Interest . Finally , the government controls licensing of exploration and production of fields . The fund invests in developed financial markets outside Norway . Spending from the fund is constrained by the budgetary rule ( Handlingsregelen ) , which limits spending over time to no more than the real value yield of the fund , originally assumed to be 4 % a year , but lowered in 2017 to 3 % of the fund 's total value .
; Oil fields
Between 1966 and 2013 , Norwegian companies drilled 5085 oil wells , mostly in the North Sea . Of these 3672 are utviklingsbrnner ( regular production ) ; 1413 are letebrnner ( exploration ) ; and 1405 have been terminated ( avsluttet ) .
Oil fields not yet in production phase include : Wisting Centralcalculated size in 2013 , 65156 ; million barrels of oil and , ( utvinnbar ) of gas . and the Castberg Oil Field ( Castberg-feltet ) calculated size 540 million barrels of oil , and ( utvinnbar ) of gas . Both oil fields are located in the Barents Sea .
; Fish industry
Norway is also the world 's second-largest exporter of fish ( in value , after China ) . Fish from fish farms and catch constitutes the second largest ( behind oil/natural gas ) export product measured in value .
; Electricity
[ plants ] generate roughly 9899 % of Norway 's electric power , more than any other country in the world .
; Mineral resources
Norway contains significant mineral resources , and in 2013 , its mineral production was valued at US $ 1.5 ; billion ( Norwegian Geological Survey data ) . The most valuable minerals are calcium carbonate ( limestone ) , building stone , nepheline syenite , olivine , iron , titanium , and nickel .
; Norwegian Pension Fund
In 2017 , the Government Pension Fund controlled assets surpassed a value of US $ 1 trillion ( equal to US $ 190,000 per capita ) , about 250 % of Norway 's 2017 GDP . It is the largest sovereign wealth fund in the world . The fund controls about 1.3 % of all listed shares in Europe , and more than 1 % of all the publicly traded shares in the world . The Norwegian Central Bank operates investment offices in London , New York , and Shanghai . Guidelines implemented in 2007 allow the fund to invest up to 60 % of the capital in shares ( maximum of 40 % prior ) , while the rest may be placed in bonds and real-estate . As the stock markets tumbled in September 2008 , the fund was able to buy more shares at low prices . In this way , the losses incurred by the market turmoil was recuperated by November 2009.
Other nations with economies based on natural resources , such as Russia , are trying to learn from Norway by establishing similar funds . The investment choices of the Norwegian fund are directed by Socially responsible investing ; for example , the fund is not allowed to invest in companies that produce parts for nuclear weapons . Norway 's highly transparency ( market ) investment scheme is lauded by the international community . The future size of the fund is closely linked to the price of oil and to developments in international financial markets .
In 2000 , the government sold one-third of the state-owned oil company Statoil in an Initial public offering . The next year , the main telecom supplier , Telenor , was listed on Oslo Stock Exchange . The state also owns significant shares of Norway 's largest bank , DNB ASA and the airline Scandinavian Airlines . Since 2000 , economic growth has been rapid , pushing unemployment down to levels not seen since the early 1980s ( unemployment in 2007 : 1.3 % ) . The international financial crisis has primarily affected the industrial sector , but unemployment has remained low , and was at 3.3 % ( 86,000 people ) in August 2011 . In contrast to Norway , Sweden had substantially higher actual and projected unemployment numbers as a result of the recession . Thousands of mainly young Swedes migrated to Norway for work during these years , which is easy , as the labour market and social security systems overlap in the Nordic Countries . In the first quarter of 2009 , the GNP of Norway surpassed Sweden 's for the first time in history , although its population is half the size .
=== Transport ===
Due to the low population density , narrow shape and long coastlines of Norway , its public transport is less developed than in many European countries , especially outside the major cities . The country has long-standing water transport traditions , but the Norwegian Ministry of Transport and Communications has in recent years implemented rail , road , and air transport through numerous subsidiaries to develop the country 's infrastructure . Under discussion is development of a new high-speed rail system between the nation 's largest cities .
Norway 's main railway network consists of of standard gauge lines , of which is double track and [ rail ] ( 210 ; km/h ) while 62 % is electrified at . The railways transported 56,827,000 passengers 2,956 million Units of transportation measurement passenger-kilometres and 24,783,000 tonnes of cargo 3,414 million Units of transportation measurement tonne-kilometres . The entire network is owned by the Norwegian National Rail Administration . All domestic passenger trains except the Flytoget are operated by Norwegian State Railways ( NSB ) . Several companies operate freight trains .
Investment in new infrastructure and maintenance is financed through the state budget , and subsidies are provided for passenger train operations . NSB operates long-haul trains , including NSB Night Train , regional services and four commuter rail systems , around Oslo Commuter Rail , Trndelag Commuter Rail , Bergen Commuter Rail and Jren Line .
Norway has approximately of road network , of which are paved and are motorway . The four tiers of road routes are national , county , municipal and private , with national and primary county roads numbered en route . The most important national routes are part of the International E-road network scheme . The two most prominent are the European route E6 going northsouth through the entire country , and the European route E39 , which follows the West Coast . National and county roads are managed by the Norwegian Public Roads Administration .
Norway has the world 's largest registered stock of plug-in electric vehicles in Norway plug-in electric vehicles per capita . In March 2014 , Norway became the first country where over 1 in every 100 passenger cars on the roads is a plug-in electric . The plug-in electric segment market share of new car sales is also the highest in the world . According to a report by Dagens Nringsliv in June 2016 , the country would like to ban sales of gasoline and diesel powered vehicles as early as 2025 . In June 2017 , 42 % of new cars registered were electric .
Of the 98 airports in Norway , 52 are public , and 46 are operated by the state-owned Avinor . List of the largest airports in the Nordic countries have more than one million passengers annually . A total of 41,089,675 passengers passed through Norwegian airports in 2007 , of whom 13,397,458 were international .
The central gateway to Norway by air is Oslo Airport , Gardermoen . Located about northeast of Oslo , it is airline hub for the two major Norwegian airlines : Scandinavian Airlines and Norwegian Air Shuttle , and for regional aircraft from Western Norway . There are departures to most European countries and some intercontinental destinations . A direct high-speed train connects to Oslo Central Station every 10 minutes for a 20 min ride .
== Demographics ==
=== Population ===
Norway 's population was 5,384,576 people as of the third quarter of 2020 . Norwegians are an ethnic North Germanic peoples people . Since the late 20th century , Norway has attracted immigrants from southern and central Europe , the Middle East , Africa , Asia and beyond .
The total fertility rate ( TFR ) in 2018 was estimated at 1.56 children born per woman , below the replacement rate of 2.1 , it remains considerably below the high of 4.69 children born per woman in 1877 . In 2018 the median age of the Norwegian population was 39.3 years .
In 2012 , an official study showed that 86 % of the total population have at least one parent who was born in Norway . As of 2020 approximately 980,000 individuals ( 18.2 % ) are immigrants and their descendants . Among these approximately 189,000 are children of immigrants , born in Norway .
Of these 980,000 immigrants and their descendants :
* 485,500 ( 49.5 % ) have a Western culture background ( Europe , USA , Canada and Oceania )
* 493,700 ( 50.5 % ) have a non-Western background ( Asia , Africa , South and Central America ) .
In 2013 , the Norwegian government said that 14 % of the Norwegian population were immigrants or children of two immigrant parents . About 6 % of the immigrant population come from EU , North America and Australia , and about 8.1 % come from Asia , Africa and Latin America .
In 2012 , of the total 660,000 with immigrant background , 407,262 had Norwegian citizenship ( 62.2 % ) .
Immigrants have settled in all Norwegian people municipalities . The cities or municipalities with the highest share of immigrants in 2012 were Oslo ( 32 % ) and Drammen ( 27 % ) . The share in Stavanger was 16 % . According to Reuters , Oslo is the `` fastest growing city in Europe because of increased immigration '' . In recent years , immigration has accounted for most of Norway 's population growth . In 2011 , 16 % of newborn children were of immigrant background .
The Smi people are indigenous to the Far North and have traditionally inhabited central and northern parts of Norway and Sweden , as well as areas in northern Finland and in Russia on the Kola Peninsula . Another national minority are the Kven people , descendants of Finnish-speaking people who migrated to northern Norway from the 18th up to the 20th century . From the 19th century up to the 1970s , the Norwegian government tried to assimilate both the Smi and the Kven , encouraging them to adopt the majority language , culture and religion . Because of this `` Norwegianization process '' , many families of Smi or Kven ancestry now identify as ethnic Norwegian .
=== Migration ===
; Emigration
Particularly in the 19th century , when economic conditions were difficult in Norway , tens of thousands of people migrated to the United States and Canada , where they could work and buy land in frontier areas . Many went to the Midwest and Pacific Northwest . In 2006 , according to the US Census Bureau , almost 4.7 ; million persons identified as Norwegian Americans , which was larger than the population of ethnic Norwegians in Norway itself . In the 2011 Canadian census , 452,705 Canadian citizens identified as having Norwegian Canadian .
; Immigration
, the number of immigrants or children of two immigrants residing in Norway was 710,465 , or 14.1 % of the total population , up from 183,000 in 1992 . Yearly immigration has increased since 2005 . While yearly net immigration in 20012005 was on average 13,613 , it increased to 37,541 between 2006 and 2010 , and in 2011 net immigration reached 47,032 . This is mostly because of increased immigration by residents of the EU , in particular from Poland .
In 2012 , the immigrant community ( which includes immigrants and children born in Norway of immigrant parents ) grew by 55,300 , a record high . Net immigration from abroad reached 47,300 ( 300 higher than in 2011 ) , while immigration accounted for 72 % of Norway 's population growth . 17 % of newborn children were born to immigrant parents . Children of Pakistani , Somali and Norwegian Vietnamese parents made up the largest groups of all Norwegians born to immigrant parents .
Pakistani Norwegians are the largest non-European minority group in Norway . Most of their 32,700 members live in and around Oslo . The Iraqis in Norway and Somali people immigrant populations have increased significantly in recent years . After the enlargement of the EU in 2004 , a wave of immigrants arrived from Central and Northern Europe , particularly Poland , Sweden and Lithuania . The fastest growing immigrant groups in 2011 in absolute numbers were from Poland , Lithuania and Sweden . The policies of immigration and integration have been the subject of much debate in Norway .
=== Religion ===
==== Church of Norway ====
Separation of church and state # Norway happened significantly later in Norway than in most of Europe , and remains incomplete . In 2012 , the Norwegian parliament voted to grant the Church of Norway greater autonomy , a decision which was confirmed in a constitutional amendment on 21 May 2012.
Until 2012 parliamentary officials were required to be members of the Evangelical-Lutheran Church of Norway , and at least half of all government ministers had to be a member of the state church . As state church , the Church of Norway 's clergy were viewed as state employees , and the central and regional church administrations were part of the state administration . Members of the Royal family are required to be members of the Lutheran church . On 1 January 2017 , Norway made the church independent of the state , but retained the Church 's status as the `` people 's church '' .
Most Norwegians are registered at baptism as members of the Church of Norway , which has been Norway 's state church since its establishment . In recent years the church has been granted increasing internal autonomy , but it retains its special constitutional status and other special ties to the state , and the constitution requires that the reigning monarch must be a member and states that the country 's values are based on its Christian and humanist heritage . Many remain in the church to participate in the community and practices such as baptism , confirmation , marriage and burial rites . About 70.6 % of Norwegians were members of the Church of Norway in 2017 . In 2017 , about 53.6 % of all newborns were baptised and about 57.9 % of all 15-year-old persons were Confirmation ( Lutheran Church ) in the church .
==== Religious affiliation ====
According to the 2010 Eurobarometer Poll , 22 % of Norwegian citizens responded that `` they believe there is a God '' , 44 % responded that `` they believe there is some sort of spirit or life force '' and 29 % responded that `` they do n't believe there is any sort of spirit , God or life force '' . Five percent gave no response . In the early 1990s , studies estimated that between 4.7 % and 5.3 % of Norwegians attended church on a weekly basis . This figure has dropped to about 2 % .
In 2010 , 10 % of the population was Irreligion , while another 9 % were members of religious communities outside the Church of Norway . Other Christian denominations total about 4.9 % of the population , the largest of which is the Roman Catholic Church , with 83,000 members , according to 2009 government statistics . The Aftenposten ( Norwegian , The Evening Post ) in October 2012 reported there were about 115,234 registered Roman Catholics in Norway ; the reporter estimated that the total number of people with a Roman Catholic background may be 170,000200,000 or higher .
Others include Pentecostalism ( 39,600 ) , the Evangelical Lutheran Free Church of Norway ( 19,600 ) , Methodists ( 11,000 ) , Baptists ( 9,900 ) , Eastern Orthodox ( 9,900 ) , Brunstad Christian Church ( 6,800 ) , Seventh-day Adventists ( 5,100 ) , Religion in Iraq # Christianity , and others . The Swedish , Finnish and Icelandic Lutheran congregations in Norway have about 27,500 members in total . Other Christian denominations comprise less than 1 % each , including 4,000 members in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and 12,000 Jehovah 's Witnesses .
Among non-Christian religions , Islam in Norway is the largest , with 166,861 registered members ( 2018 ) , and probably fewer than 200,000 in total . It is practised mainly by Somali people , Arab diaspora , Bosniaks , Kurds and Turkish people immigrants , as well as Pakistani Norwegians .
Other religions comprise less than 1 % each , including 819 adherents of History of the Jews in Norway . Indian immigrants introduced Hinduism to Norway , which in 2011 has slightly more than 5,900 adherents , or 1 % of non-Lutheran Norwegians . Sikhism has approximately 3,000 adherents , with most living in Oslo , which has two gurdwaras . Sikhs first came to Norway in the early 1970s . The troubles in Punjab after Operation Blue Star and riots committed against Sikhs in India after the assassination of Indira Gandhi led to an increase in Sikh refugees moving to Norway . Drammen also has a sizeable population of Sikhs ; the largest gurdwara in north Europe was built in Lier , Norway . There are eleven Buddhism organisations , grouped under the Buddhist Federation of Norway organisation , with slightly over 14,000 members , which make up 0.2 % of the population . The Bah Faith religion has slightly more than 1,000 adherents . Around 1.7 % ( 84,500 ) of Norwegians belong to the secular Norwegian Humanist Association .
From 2006 to 2011 , the fastest-growing religious communities in Norway were Eastern Orthodoxy in Norway and Oriental Orthodoxy in Norway , which grew in membership by 80 % ; however , their share of the total population remains small , at 0.2 % . It is associated with the huge immigration from Eritrea and Ethiopia , and to a lesser extent from Central Europe and Eastern European and Middle Eastern countries . Other fast-growing religions were Roman Catholicism in Norway ( 78.7 % ) , Hinduism in Norway ( 59.6 % ) , Islam in Norway ( 48.1 % ) , and Buddhism in Norway ( 46.7 % ) .
==== Indigenous religions ====
As in other Scandinavian countries , the ancient Norse followed a form of native Germanic paganism known as Norse paganism . By the end of the 11th century , when Norway had been Christianization of Scandinavia , the indigenous Norse religion and practices were prohibited . Remnants of the native religion and beliefs of Norway survive today in the form of names , referential names of cities and locations , the days of the week , and other parts of everyday language . Modern interest in the old ways has led to a revival of pagan religious practices in the form of Germanic Neopaganism . The Norwegian satrufellesskapet Bifrost formed in 1996 ; in 2011 , the fellowship had about 300 members . Foreningen Forn Sed was formed in 1999 and has been recognised by the Norwegian government .
The Smi minority retained their Smi shamanism well into the 18th century , when most converted to Christianity under the influence of Dano-Norwegian Lutheran missionaries . Although some insist that `` indigenous Smi religion had effectively been eradicated , ' athropologist Gutorm Gjessing 's Changing Lapps ( 1954 ) argues that the Smi 's `` were outwardly and to all practical purposes converted to Christianity , but at the subconscious and unconscious level , the shamistic frenzy survived , more or less latent , only awaiting the necessary stimulus to break out into the open . '' Today there is a renewed appreciation for the Smi traditional way of life , which has led to a revival of Noaidevuohta . Some Norwegian and Smi celebrities are reported to visit shamans for guidance .
=== Health ===
Norway was awarded first place according to the UN 's Human Development Index ( HDI ) for 2013 . In the 1800s , by contrast , poverty and communicable diseases dominated in Norway together with famines and epidemics . From the 1900s , improvements in public health occurred as a result of development in several areas such as social and living conditions , changes in disease and medical outbreaks , establishment of the health care system , and emphasis on public health matters . Vaccination and increased treatment opportunities with antibiotics resulted in great improvements within the Norwegian population . Improved hygiene and better nutrition were factors that contributed to improved health .
The disease pattern in Norway changed from communicable diseases to non-communicable diseases and chronic diseases as cardiovascular disease . Inequalities and social differences are still present in public health in Norway today .
In 2013 the infant mortality rate was 2.5 per 1,000 live births among children under the age of one . For girls it was 2.7 and for boys 2.3 , which is the lowest infant mortality rate for boys ever recorded in Norway .
=== Education ===
Higher education in Norway is offered by a range of seven List of universities in Norway , five specialised colleges , 25 university colleges as well as a range of private colleges . Education follows the Bologna Process involving Bachelor 's degree ( 3 years ) , Master 's degree ( 2 years ) and PhD ( 3 years ) degrees . Acceptance is offered after finishing Education in Norway with general study competence .
Public education is virtually free , regardless of nationality . The academic year has two Academic term , from August to December and from January to June . The ultimate responsibility for the education lies with the Norwegian Ministry of Education and Research .
=== Languages ===
Norwegian in its two forms , Bokml and Nynorsk , is the main national official language of all of Norway . Smi , a group which includes three separate languages , is an official language alongside Norwegian in the Smi administrative linguistic area ( Forvaltningsomrdet for samisk sprk ) in Northern Norway while Kven language is an official language in one municipality , also in Northern Norway .
The North Germanic languages Norwegian language has two official written forms , Bokml and Nynorsk . Both are used in public administration , schools , churches , and media . Bokml is the written language used by a large majority of about 8085 % . Around 95 % of the population speak Norwegian as their first or native language , although many speak dialects that may differ significantly from the written languages . All Norwegian dialects are mutually intelligible , although listeners with limited exposure to dialects other than their own may struggle to understand certain phrases and pronunciations in some other dialects .
Several Uralic languages Smi languages are spoken and written throughout the country , traditionally in the north and to a lesser degree in some parts of Central Norway , by some members of the Smi people . ( Estimates suggest that about one third of the Norwegian Smi speak a Smi language . ) Speakers have a right to be educated and to receive communication from the government in their own language in a special forvaltningsomrde ( administrative area ) for Smi languages . The Kven people minority historically spoke the Uralic Kven language ( considered a separate language in Norway , but generally perceived as a Finnish dialect in Finland ) . Today the majority of ethnic Kven have little or no knowledge of the language . According to the Kainun institutti , `` The typical modern Kven is a Norwegian-speaking Norwegian who knows his genealogy . '' As Norway has ratified the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages ( ECRML ) the Kven language together with Romani language and Scandoromani language has become officially recognised minority languages .
Some supporters have also advocated making Norwegian Sign Language an official language of the country .
In the 19th and 20th centuries , the Norwegian language was subject to Norwegian language conflict . This led to the development of Nynorsk in the 19th century and to the formation of alternative spelling standards in the 20th century .
Norwegian is similar to its neighbour North Germanic languages ; Swedish language and Danish language . All three languages are to a degree mutually intelligible and can be , and commonly are , employed in communication among inhabitants of the Scandinavian countries . As a result of the co-operation within the Nordic Council , inhabitants of all Nordic countries , including Iceland and Finland , have the right to communicate with Norwegian authorities in their own language .
Students who are children of immigrant parents are encouraged to learn the Norwegian language . The Norwegian government offers language instructional courses for immigrants wishing to obtain Norwegian citizenship . With increasing concern about assimilating immigrants , since 1 September 2008 , the government has required that an applicant for Norwegian citizenship give evidence of proficiency in either Norwegian or in one of the Smi languages , or give proof of having attended classes in Norwegian for 300 hours , or meet the language requirements for university studies in Norway ( that is , by being proficient in one of the Scandinavian languages ) .
The primary foreign language taught in Norwegian schools is English , considered an international language since the post-WWII era . The majority of the population is fairly fluent in English , especially those born after World War II . German , French and Spanish are also commonly taught as second or , more often , third languages . Russian , Japanese , Italian , Latin , and rarely Standard Mandarin Chinese ( Mandarin ) are offered in some schools , mostly in the cities . Traditionally , English , German and French were considered the main foreign languages in Norway . These languages , for instance , were used on Norwegian passports until the 1990s , and university students have a general right to use these languages when submitting their theses .
== Culture ==
The Norwegian farm culture continues to play a role in contemporary Norwegian culture . In the 19th century , it inspired a strong Norwegian romantic nationalism movement , which is still visible in the Norwegian language and : Category : Mass media in Norway . Norwegian culture blossomed with nationalist efforts to achieve an independent identity in the areas of literature , art and music . This continues today in the performing arts and as a result of government support for exhibitions , cultural projects and artwork .
=== Human rights ===
Norway has been considered a progressive country , which has adopted legislation and policies to support women 's rights , minority rights , and LGBT rights in Norway . As early as 1884 , 171 of the leading figures , among them five Prime Ministers for the Liberal Party and the Conservative Party , co-founded the Norwegian Association for Women 's Rights . They successfully campaigned for women 's right to education , women 's suffrage , the right to work , and other gender equality policies . From the 1970s , gender equality also came high on the state agenda , with the establishment of a public body to promote gender equality , which evolved into the Gender Equality and Anti-Discrimination Ombud . Civil society organisations also continue to play an important role , and the women 's rights organisations are today organised in the Norwegian Women 's Lobby umbrella organisation .
In 1990 , the Norwegian constitution was amended to grant absolute primogeniture to the Norwegian throne , meaning that the eldest child , regardless of gender , takes precedence in the line of succession . As it was not retroactive , the current successor to the throne is the eldest son of the King , rather than his eldest child . The Norwegian constitution Article 6 states that `` For those born before the year 1990 it shall ... be the case that a male shall take precedence over a female . ''
The Smi people have for centuries been the subject of discrimination and abuse by the dominant cultures in Scandinavia and Russia , those countries claiming possession of Smi lands . The Smi people have never been a single community in a single region of Spmi . Norway has been greatly criticised by the international community for the politics of Norwegianization of and discrimination against the indigenous population of the country . Nevertheless , Norway was , in 1990 , the first country to recognise Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention , 1989 ILO-convention 169 on indigenous people recommended by the UN .
In regard to LGBT rights , Norway was the first country in the world to enact an anti-discrimination law protecting the rights of gays and lesbians . In 1993 , Norway became the second country to legalise civil union partnerships for same-sex couples , and on 1 January 2009 Same-sex marriage in Norway to legalize same-sex marriage . As a promoter of human rights , Norway has held the annual Oslo Freedom Forum conference , a gathering described by The Economist as `` on its way to becoming a human-rights equivalent of the Davos economic forum . ''
=== Cinema ===
The Norwegian cinema has received international recognition . The documentary film Kon-Tiki ( 1950 film ) Kon-Tiki ( 1950 ) won an Academy Awards . In 1959 , Arne Skouen 's Nine Lives was nominated , but failed to win . Another notable film is The Pinchcliffe Grand Prix ( English : Pinchcliffe Grand Prix ) , an animated feature film directed by Ivo Caprino . The film was released in 1975 and is based on characters from Norwegian cartoonist Kjell Aukrust . It is the most widely seen Norwegian film of all time .
Nils Gaup 's Pathfinder ( 1987 film ) ( 1987 ) , the story of the Smi people , was nominated for an Oscar . Berit Nesheim 's The Other Side of Sunday was nominated for an Oscar in 1997.
Since the 1990s , the film industry has thrived , producing up to 20 feature films each year . Particular successes were Kristin Lavransdatter , based on a novel by a Nobel Prize winner ; The Telegraphist and Gurin with the Foxtail . Knut Erik Jensen was among the more successful new directors , together with Erik Skjoldbjrg , who is remembered for Insomnia ( 1997 film ) .
The country has also been used as filming location for several Hollywood and other international productions , including The Empire Strikes Back ( 1980 ) , for which the producers used Hardangerjkulen glacier as a filming location for scenes of the ice planet Hoth . It included a memorable battle in the snow . The films Die Another Day , The Golden Compass ( film ) , Spies Like Us and The Heroes of Telemark , as well as the TV series Lilyhammer and Vikings ( 2013 TV series ) also had scenes set in Norway . A short film , The Spirit of Norway , was featured at Maelstrom ( ride ) at Norway ( Epcot ) Pavilion at Epcot located within Walt Disney World Resort in Florida in the United States . The attraction and the film ceased their operations on 5 October 2014.
=== Music ===
The classical music of Norway of the romanticism composers Edvard Grieg , Rikard Nordraak and Johan Svendsen is internationally known , as is the modern music of Arne Nordheim . Norway 's classical performers include Leif Ove Andsnes , one of the world 's more famous pianists ; Truls Mrk , an outstanding cellist ; and the great Wagnerian soprano Kirsten Flagstad .
Early Norwegian black metal scene , a form of rock music in Norway , has been an influence in world music since the late 20th century . Since the 1990s , Norway 's export of black metal , a lo-fi , dark and raw form of [ metal music heavy metal ] , has been developed by such bands as Emperor ( band ) , Darkthrone , Gorgoroth , Mayhem ( band ) , Burzum and Immortal ( band ) . More recently , bands such as Enslaved ( band ) , Kvelertak , Dimmu Borgir and Satyricon ( band ) have evolved the genre into the present day while still garnering worldwide fans . Controversial events associated with the black metal movement in the early 1990s included several Church arson and two prominent Black metal # Aarseth 's murder .
The jazz scene in Norway is thriving . Jan Garbarek , Terje Rypdal , Mari Boine , Arild Andersen and Bugge Wesseltoft are internationally recognised while Paal Nilssen-Love , Supersilent , Jaga Jazzist and Wibutee are becoming world-class artists of the younger generation .
Norway has a strong folk music tradition which remains popular to this day . Among the most prominent folk musicians are Hardanger fiddlers Andrea Een , Olav Jrgen Hegge and Annbjrg Lien , and the vocalists Agnes Buen Garns , Kirsten Brten Berg and Odd Nordstoga .
Other internationally recognised bands are A-ha , Ryksopp and Ylvis . A-ha initially rose to global fame during the mid-1980s . In the 1990s and 2000s , the group maintained its popularity domestically , and has remained successful outside Norway , especially in Germany , Switzerland , France , and Brazil .
Some of the most memorable female solo artists from Norway are Susanne Sundfr , Sigrid ( singer ) , Astrid S , Adeln , Julie Bergan , Maria Mena , Tone Damli , Margaret Berger , Lene Marlin , Christel Alsos , Maria Arredondo , Marion Raven and Marit Larsen ( both former members of the defunct pop-rock group M2M ( band ) ) , Lene Nystrm ( vocalist of the Danish eurodance group Aqua ( band ) ) and Anni-Frid Lyngstad ( vocalist of the Swedish pop group ABBA ) .
In recent years , various Norwegian songwriters and production teams have contributed to the music of other international artists . The Norwegian production team Stargate ( production team ) has produced songs for Rihanna , Beyonc , Shakira , Jennifer Lopez and Lionel Richie , among others . Espen Lind has written and produced songs for Beyonc , Lionel Richie and Leona Lewis , among others . Lene Marlin has written songs for Rihanna and Lovebugs ( band ) . Ina Wroldsen has written songs for artists such as Demi Lovato , Shakira , Inna , Sophie Ellis-Bextor , One Direction and The Saturdays , among others .
Norway enjoys many music festivals throughout the year , all over the country . Norway is the host of one of the world 's biggest extreme sport festivals with music , Ekstremsportvekoa festival held annually in Voss . Oslo is the host of many festivals , such as yafestivalen and by : Larm . Oslo used to have a summer parade similar to the German Love Parade . In 1992 , the city of Oslo wanted to adopt the French music festival Fte de la Musique . Fredrik Carl Strmer established the festival . Even in its first year , `` Musikkens Dag '' gathered thousands of people and artists in the streets of Oslo . `` Musikkens Dag '' is now renamed Musikkfest Oslo .
=== Literature ===
The history of Norwegian literature starts with the Norse paganism Poetic Edda and skaldic verse of the 9th and 10th centuries , with poets such as Bragi Boddason and Eyvindr skldaspillir . The arrival of Christianity around the year 1000 brought Norway into contact with European medieval learning , [ and history writing . Merged with native oral tradition and Icelandic influence , this influenced the literature written in the late 12th and early 13th centuries . Major works of that period include Historia Norwegi ] , [ [ irekssaga and Konungs skuggsj .
Little Norwegian literature came out of the period of the Scandinavian Union and the subsequent Dano-Norwegian union ( 13871814 ) , with some notable exceptions such as Petter Dass and Ludvig Holberg . In his play Peer Gynt , Ibsen characterised this period as `` Twice two hundred years of darkness/brooded o'er the race of monkeys . '' The first line of this couplet is frequently quoted . During the union with Denmark , the government imposed using only written Danish , which decreased the writing of Norwegian literature .
Two major events precipitated a major resurgence in Norwegian literature : in 1811 a Norwegian university was established in Oslo . Secondly , seized by the spirit of revolution following the American Revolution and French Revolution revolutions , the Norwegians created their first Constitution of Norway in 1814 . Strong authors were inspired who became recognised first in Scandinavia , and then worldwide ; among them were Henrik Wergeland , Peter Christen Asbjrnsen , Jrgen Moe and Camilla Collett .
By the late 19th century , in the Golden Age of Norwegian literature , the so-called `` Great Four '' emerged : Henrik Ibsen , Bjrnstjerne Bjrnson , Alexander Kielland , and Jonas Lie ( writer ) . Bjrnson 's `` peasant novels '' , such as Ein glad gut ( A Happy Boy ) and Synnve Solbakken , are typical of the Norwegian romantic nationalism of their day . Kielland 's novels and short stories are mostly naturalistic . Although an important contributor to early romantic nationalism , ( especially Peer Gynt ) , Henrik Ibsen is better known for his pioneering realistic dramas such as The Wild Duck and A Doll 's House . They caused an uproar because of his candid portrayals of the middle classes , complete with infidelity , unhappy marriages , and corrupt businessmen .
In the 20th century , three Norwegian novelists were awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature : Bjrnstjerne Bjrnson in 1903 , Knut Hamsun for the book Growth of the Soil ( `` Growth of the Soil '' ) in 1920 , and Sigrid Undset ( known for Kristin Lavransdatter ) in 1928 . Writers such as the following also made important contributions : Dag Solstad , Jon Fosse , Cora Sandel , Olav Duun , Olav H. Hauge , Gunvor Hofmo , Stein Mehren , Kjell Askildsen , Hans Herbjrnsrud , Aksel Sandemose , Bergljot Hobk Haff , Jostein Gaarder , Erik Fosnes Hansen , Jens Bjrneboe , Kjartan Flgstad , Lars Saabye Christensen , Johan Borgen , Herbjrg Wassmo , Jan Erik Vold , Rolf Jacobsen ( poet ) , Olaf Bull , Jan Kjrstad , Georg Johannesen , Tarjei Vesaas , Sigurd Hoel , Arnulf verland , Karl Ove Knausgrd and Johan Falkberget .
=== Research ===
Internationally recognised Norwegian scientists include the mathematicians Niels Henrik Abel , Sophus Lie and Atle Selberg , physical chemist Lars Onsager , physicist Ivar Giaever , chemists Odd Hassel , Peter Waage , and Cato Maximilian Guldberg .
In the 20th century , Norwegian academics have been pioneering in many social sciences , including criminology , sociology and peace and conflict studies . Prominent academics include Arne Nss , a philosopher and founder of deep ecology ; Johan Galtung , the founder of peace studies ; Nils Christie and Thomas Mathiesen , criminologists ; Fredrik Barth , a social anthropologist ; Vilhelm Aubert , Harriet Holter and Erik Grnseth , sociologists ; Tove Stang Dahl , a pioneer of women 's law ; Stein Rokkan , a political scientist ; and economists Ragnar Frisch , Trygve Haavelmo , and Finn E. Kydland .
In 2014 , the two Norwegian scientists May-Britt Moser and Edvard Moser won the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine along with John O'Keefe ( neuroscientist ) John O'Keefe . They won the prize for their groundbreaking work identifying the cells that make up a positioning system in the human brain , our `` in-built GPS '' .
=== Architecture ===
With expansive forests , Norway has long had a tradition of building in wood . Many of today 's most interesting new buildings are made of wood , reflecting the strong appeal that this material continues to hold for Norwegian designers and builders .
With Norway 's conversion to Christianity some 1,000 years ago , churches were built . Stonework architecture was introduced from Europe for the most important structures , beginning with the construction of Nidaros Cathedral in Trondheim . In the early Middle Ages , wooden stave churches were constructed throughout Norway . Some of them have survived ; they represent Norway 's most unusual contribution to architectural history . A fine example , Urnes Stave Church in inner Sognefjord , is on UNESCO 's World Heritage List . Another notable example of wooden architecture is the buildings at Bryggen Wharf in Bergen , also on the list for World Cultural Heritage sites , consisting of a row of tall , narrow wooden structures along the quayside .
In the 17th century , under the Danish monarchy , cities and villages such as Kongsberg and Rros were established . The city Kongsberg had a church built in the Baroque style . Traditional wooden buildings that were constructed in Rros have survived .
After Norway 's union with Denmark was dissolved in 1814 , Oslo became the capital . The architect Christian Heinrich Grosch Christian H. Grosch designed the earliest parts of the University of Oslo , the Oslo Stock Exchange , and many other buildings and churches constructed in that early national period .
At the beginning of the 20th century , the city of lesund was rebuilt in the Art Nouveau style , influenced by styles of France . The 1930s , when functionalism dominated , became a strong period for Norwegian architecture . It is only since the late 20th century that Norwegian architects have achieved international renown . One of the most striking modern buildings in Norway is the Smi Parliament of Norway in Karasjok , designed by Stein Halvorson and Christian Sundby . Its debating chamber , in timber , is an abstract version of a lavvo , the traditional tent used by the nomadic Smi people .
=== Art ===
For an extended period , the Norwegian art scene was dominated by artwork from Germany and Holland as well as by the influence of Copenhagen . It was in the 19th century that a truly Norwegian era began , first with portraits , later with impressive landscapes . Johan Christian Dahl ( 17881857 ) , originally from the Dresden school , eventually returned to paint the landscapes of western Norway , defining Norwegian painting for the first time . ''
Norway 's newly found independence from Denmark encouraged painters to develop their Norwegian identity , especially with landscape painting by artists such as Kitty Lange Kielland , a female painter who studied under Hans Gude , and Harriet Backer , another pioneer among female artists , influenced by impressionism . Frits Thaulow , an impressionist , was influenced by the art scene in Paris as was Christian Krohg , a realist painter , famous for his paintings of prostitutes .
Of particular note is Edvard Munch , a symbolist/expressionist painter who became world-famous for The Scream which is said to represent the anxiety of modern man .
Other artists of note include Harald Sohlberg , a neo-romantic painter remembered for his paintings of Rros , and Odd Nerdrum , a figurative painter who maintains that his work is not art , but kitsch .
=== Cuisine ===
: Category : Norwegian cuisine Norway 's culinary traditions show the influence of long seafaring and farming traditions , with salmon ( fresh and cured ) , [ ( pickled or marinated ) , trout ] , [ [ codfish , and other seafood , balanced by cheeses ( such as brunost ) , dairy products , and breads ( predominantly dark/darker ) .
Lefse is a Norwegian potato flatbread , usually topped with large amounts of butter and sugar , most common around Christmas . Some traditional Norwegian dishes include lutefisk , smalahove , pinnekjtt , raspeball , and frikl . Some quirky Norwegian speciality is rakefisk , which is a fermented trout , consumed with thin flatbread ( flatbrd , not lefse ) and sour cream . And the most popular pastry among all population is vaffel . It is different from Belgian in taste and consistency and is served with sour cream , brown cheese , butter and sugar , or strawberry or raspberry jam , which can all be mixed or eaten separately .
=== Sports ===
Sports are a central part of Norwegian culture , and popular sports include association football , [ biathlon ] , [ [ cross-country skiing , ski jumping , Long track speed skating , and , to a lesser degree , ice hockey .
Association football is the most popular sport in Norway in terms of active membership . In 20142015 polling , football ranked far behind biathlon and cross-country skiing in terms of popularity as spectator sports . Ice hockey is the biggest indoor sport . The Norway women 's national handball team women 's handball national team has won several titles , including two Summer Olympics championships ( Handball at the 2008 Summer Olympics , Handball at the 2012 Summer Olympics ) , three World Women 's Handball Championship ( 1999 World Women 's Handball Championship , 2011 World Women 's Handball Championship , 2015 World Women 's Handball Championship ) , and six European Women 's Handball Championship ( 1998 European Women 's Handball Championship , 2004 European Women 's Handball Championship , 2006 European Women 's Handball Championship , 2008 European Women 's Handball Championship , 2010 European Women 's Handball Championship , 2014 European Women 's Handball Championship ) .
In association football , the Norway women 's national football team women 's national team has won the FIFA Women 's World Cup in 1995 FIFA Women 's World Cup and the Football at the Olympics in Football at the 2000 Summer Olympics  Women 's tournament . The women 's team also has two UEFA European Women 's Championship titles ( 1987 European Competition for Women 's Football , UEFA Women 's Euro 1993 ) . The Norway national football team men 's national football team has participated three times in the FIFA World Cup ( 1938 FIFA World Cup , 1994 FIFA World Cup , and 1998 FIFA World Cup ) , and once in the UEFA European Football Championship ( UEFA Euro 2000 ) . The highest FIFA ranking Norway has achieved is 2nd , a position it has held twice , in 1993 and in 1995.
Chess is also gaining popularity in Norway . Magnus Carlsen is the current world champion . There are about 10 Grandmaster ( chess ) and 29 International Masters in Norway .
Norwegian players in the National Football League ( NFL ) include Halvor Hagen , Bill Irgens , Leif Olve Dolonen Larsen , Mike Mock , and Jan Stenerud .
Bandy is a traditional sport in Norway and the country is one of the four founders of Federation of International Bandy . In terms of licensed athletes , it is the second biggest winter sport in the world . As of January 2018 , Norway national bandy team the men 's national team has captured one silver and one bronze , while Norway women 's national bandy team the women 's national team has managed five bronzes at Bandy # World Championships .
Norway first participated at the Olympic Games in 1900 , and has sent athletes to compete in every Games since then , except for the sparsely attended 1904 Summer Olympics and the 1980 Summer Olympics in Moscow when they participated in the 1980 Summer Olympics boycott American-led boycott . Norway leads All-time Olympic Games medal table at the Winter Olympic Games by a considerable margin . Famous Norwegian winter sport athletes includes Biathlon Ole Einar Bjrndalen , speed skaters Johan Olav Koss and Hjalmar Andersen , figure skater Sonja Henie and Cross-country skiing ( sport ) cross-country skiers Marit Bjrgen and Bjrn Dhlie .
Norway has hosted the Games on two occasions :
* 1952 Winter Olympics in Oslo
* 1994 Winter Olympics in Lillehammer
It also hosted the 2016 Winter Youth Olympics in Lillehammer , making Norway the first country to host both Winter regular and Youth Olympics .
=== Tourism ===
As of 2008 , Norway ranks 17th in the World Economic Forum 's Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Report . Tourism in Norway contributed to 4.2 % of the gross domestic product as reported in 2016 . Every one in fifteen people throughout the country work in the tourism industry . Tourism is seasonal in Norway , with more than half of total tourists visiting between the months of May and August .
The main attractions of Norway are the varied landscapes that extend across the Arctic Circle . It is famous for its fjord-indented coastline and its mountains , ski resorts , lakes and woods . Popular tourist destinations in Norway include Oslo , lesund , Bergen , Stavanger , Trondheim , Kristiansand and Troms . Much of the nature of Norway remains unspoiled , and thus attracts numerous hikers and skiers . The fjords , mountains and waterfalls in Western Norway and Northern Norway attract several hundred thousand foreign tourists each year . In the cities , cultural idiosyncrasies such as the Holmenkollen ski jump attract many visitors , as do landmarks such as Bergen 's Bryggen and Oslo 's Vigeland Sculpture Park .
== See also ==
* Aristocracy of Norway
* Historical capitals of Norway
* International rankings of Norway
* Outline of Norway
* Wildlife of Norway
== Notes ==
== References ==
== Bibliography ==
*
== External links ==
* Norway.no , Norway 's official portal
*
* Statistics Norway
* State of the Environment Norway
* Norway . The World Factbook . Central Intelligence Agency .
* Norway entry at Encyclopdia Britannica
* Norway from UCB Libraries GovPubs
* Norway profile from the BBC News
* Norway.info , official foreign portal of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs ( Norway )
*
*
* Official facts about Norway
* VisitNorway.com , official travel guide to Norway .
*
* Key Development Forecasts for Norway from International Futures
* World Bank Summary Trade Statistics Norway
Category : Norway
Category : Northern European countries
Category : Member states of the United Nations
Category : Member states of the Council of Europe
Category : Member states of NATO
Category : Members of the Nordic Council
Category : Member states of the European Free Trade Association
Category : Scandinavian countries
Category : States and territories established in the 870s
Category:872 establishments
Category : States and territories established in 1814
Category : States and territories established in 1905
Category : Countries in Europe
Category : Christian states <article_end> <article_start>  
Saint Lucia ( , ; Sainte-Lucie ) is a sovereign state island country in the West Indies in the eastern Caribbean Sea on the boundary with the Atlantic Ocean . The island was previously called Iyonola , the name given to the island by the native Arawaks and later , Hewanorra , the name given by the native Island Caribs , two separate Amerindian peoples . Part of the Lesser Antilles , it is located north/northeast of the island of Saint Vincent ( Antilles ) , northwest of Barbados and south of Martinique . It covers a land area of and reported a population of 165,595 in the 2010 census . Its capital is Castries .
The French were the first Europeans to settle on the island . They signed a treaty with the native Island Caribs in 1660 . England took control of the island from 1663 to 1667 . In ensuing years , it was at war with France fourteen times , and the rule of the island changed frequently ( it was ruled seven times each by the French and British ) . In 1814 , the British took definitive control of the island . Because it switched so often between British and French control , Saint Lucia was also known as the `` Helen of the West Indies '' after the Greek mythological character , Helen of Troy .
Representative government came about in 1840 ( universal suffrage was established in 1953 ) . From 1958 to 1962 , the island was a member of the West Indies Federation . On 22 February 1979 , Saint Lucia became an independent state and a member of the Commonwealth of Nations . Saint Lucia is a mixed jurisdiction , meaning that it has a legal system based in part on both the Civil law ( legal system ) and English common law . The Civil Code of St. Lucia of 1867 was based on the Civil Code of Lower Canada , as supplemented by English common law-style legislation . It is also a member of Organisation internationale de la Francophonie .
==Etymology==
One of the Windward Islands , Saint Lucia was named after Saint Lucy ( AD 283  304 ) . It is one of two countries in the world named after a woman ( Ireland is named after the Celtic goddess of fertility riu ) and the only country named after a historical woman . Saint Helena St. Helena , another island , is also named for an historical womanthe mother of Emperor Constantinebut St. Helena is a Dependent Territory of the United Kingdom and is not a sovereign nation . Legend states French sailors were shipwrecked at St. Lucia on 13 December , the feast day of St. Lucy , naming the island in honor of Sainte Lucie .
==History==
===Pre-colonial period===
The first proven inhabitants were the Taino peoples , though there may have been other native peoples prior to this . The Arawak are believed to have come from northern South America sometime around AD 200400 , as there are numerous archeology sites on the island where specimens of their well-developed pottery have been found . There is evidence to suggest that the Arawak called the island Iouanalao , meaning 'Land of the Iguanas ' , due to the island 's high number of iguanas .
The more aggressive Island Caribs arrived around AD 800 , and seized control from the Arawaks by killing their men and assimilating the women into their own society . They called the island Hewanarau , and later Hewanorra ( Ioanalao , or `` there where iguanas are found '' ) .
===Early European period===
Christopher Columbus may have sighted the island during his fourth voyage in 1502 , since he made landfall on Martinique , yet he does not mention the island in his log . Juan de la Cosa noted the island on his map of 1500 , calling it El Falcon , and another island to the south Las Agujas . A Spanish Cedula from 1511 mentions the island within the Spanish domain , and a globe in the Vatican made in 1520 , shows the island as Sancta Lucia .
In the late 1550s , the French pirate Franois le Clerc ( known as Jambe de Bois , due to his wooden leg ) set up a camp on Pigeon Island ( Saint Lucia ) , from where he attacked passing Spanish ships . In 1605 , an English vessel called the Oliphe Blossome was blown off-course on its way to Guyana , and the 67 colonists started a settlement on Saint Lucia , after initially being welcomed by the Carib chief Anthonie . By 26 September 1605 only 19 survived following continued attacks by the Carib chief Augraumart , so the settlers fled the island .
===French Colony===
In 1664 , Thomas Warner ( son of Thomas Warner ( explorer ) , the governor of St Kitts ) claimed Saint Lucia for England . He brought 1,000 men to defend it from the French , but after only two years , only 89 survived with the rest dying mostly due to disease . In 1666 , the French West India Company resumed control of the island , which in 1674 was made an official French crown colony as a dependency of Martinique .
===18th and 19th centuries===
Both the British and the French found the island attractive after the slave-based sugar industry developed , and during the 18th century the island changed ownership or was declared neutral territory a dozen times , although the French settlements remained and the island was a de facto French colony well into the eighteenth century .
In 1722 , George I of Great Britain granted both Saint Lucia and Saint Vincent ( island ) to John Montagu , 2nd Duke of Montagu . He in turn appointed Nathaniel Uring , a merchant sea captain and adventurer , as deputy-governor . Uring went to the islands with a group of seven ships , and established settlement at Petit Carenage . Unable to get enough support from British warships , he and the new colonists were quickly run off by the French .
During the Seven Years ' War , Britain occupied Saint Lucia for a year . Britain handed the island back to the French at the Treaty of Paris ( 1763 ) in 1763 . Like the English and Dutch on other islands , the French began to develop the land for the cultivation of sugar cane as a commodity crop on large plantations in 1765.
The British occupied the island again between 1778 and 1784.
In January 1791 , during the French Revolution , the National Assembly ( French Revolution ) sent four commissaires to St Lucia to spread their revolutionary philosophy . By August 1791 , slaves began to abandon their estates and Governor de Gimat fled . In December 1792 , Lt. Jean-Baptiste Raymond de Lacrosse arrived with revolutionary pamphlets , and the impoverished whites and free people of color began to arm themselves as patriots . On 1 February 1793 , France declared war on England and Holland , and General Nicolas Xavier de Ricard took over as Governor . The National Convention abolished enslavement on 4 February 1794 , but St. Lucia fell to a British invasion led by Vice Admiral John Jervis , 1st Earl of St Vincent on 1 April 1794 . Morne Fortune became Fort Charlotte . Soon , a patriot army of resistance , L'Armee Franaise dans les Bois , began to fight back . Thus started the First Brigand War .
A short time later the British invaded the island as a part of the war with France that had recently broken out . On 21 February 1795 a group of locals under the nominal control of Victor Hugues defeated a battalion of British troops at Vieux Fort and Rabot . In 1796 , Castries was burned as part of the conflict . John Moore ( British Army officer ) retook Fort Charlotte in 1796 with the 27th ( Inniskilling ) Regiment of Foot after two days of bitter fighting . As an honour , the Fusiliers ' regimental colour was displayed on the flagstaff of the captured fortress at Morne Fortune for an hour before being replaced by the Union Jack . Moore would then participate in British efforts to repress the slave rebels until falling ill of yellow fever , upon which he returned to Britain before 1798.
In 1803 , the British regained control of the island . Many of the rebels escaped into the thick rainforest where they evaded capture and established maroon communities .
The slavery on the island was continued for a short time , but anti-slavery sentiment was rising in Britain . The British stopped the import of slaves by anyone , white or coloured , when they Slave Trade Act 1807 in 1807.
France and Great Britain continued to contest Saint Lucia until the British secured it in 1814 , as part of the Treaty of Paris ( 1814 ) ending the Napoleonic Wars . Thereafter , Saint Lucia was considered part of the British Windward Islands colony .
The institution of slavery was abolished on the island in 1836 , as it was Slavery Abolition Act 1833 . After abolition , all former slaves had to serve a four-year `` apprenticeship , '' to accustom them to the idea of freedom . During this period , they worked for their former masters for at least three-quarters of the work week . Full freedom was duly granted by the British in 1838 . By that time , people of African ethnicity greatly outnumbered those of ethnic European background . Some people of Carib descent also comprised a minority on the island .
Castries ' harbour was protected by a system of 60 surrounding forts . Along the top of Morne Fortune there are six military sites , building work by the French started in 1768 , and the British completed the work by 1890 . They include Fort Charlotte ( Old Morne Fortress ) , the Apostle 's Battery ( 18881890 ) , The Powder Magazine built by the French in the 1750s , Provost 's Redoubt ( 1792 ) built as a lookout point , and the Combermere barracks .
The best preserved installation is a battery at La Toc Point , completed in 1888 it was not abandoned till 1905 . This fort in particular was built by the British to repel any attack from the United States on the then valuable Coaling ( ships ) of Castries .
===20th and 21st centuries===
The Second World War visited the island directly during the Battle of the Caribbean , when a German U-boat attacked and sank two British ships in Castries harbour on 9 March 1942.
In the mid-twentieth century , Saint Lucia joined the West Indies Federation ( 19581962 ) when the colony was dissolved . In 1967 , Saint Lucia became one of the six members of the West Indies Associated States , with internal self-government . In 1979 , it gained full independence under Sir John Compton of the conservative United Workers Party ( Saint Lucia ) United Workers party ( UWP ) . The new country chose to remain within the British Commonwealth and to retain Queen Elizabeth as Monarchy of Saint Lucia , represented locally by a Governor-General of Saint Lucia Governor-General .
===Post-independence era===
Compton 's initial term as Prime Minister lasted only a few months , as he was defeated by the left-leaning Saint Lucia Labour Party ( SLP ) under Allan Louisy in the 1979 Saint Lucian general election . The SLP sought to improve ties with socialist countries in the region such as Cuba , though the economy was severely affected by Hurricane Allen in 1980 . Louisy was replaced as Prime Minister by Winston Cenac in 1981 . The SLP government faced a series of strikes and Cenac agreed to stand down , with Michael Pilgrim of the Progressive Labour Party ( Saint Lucia ) briefly serving as Acting Prime Minister until the 1982 Saint Lucian general election . This election was won by the UWP under John Compton , who proceeded to rule the country uninterrupted until 1996 ; he was succeeded by Vaughan Lewis , who ruled for just over a year before losing the 1997 Saint Lucian general election to the SLP under Kenny Anthony . During this era the UWP adopted a generally pro-Western , pro-business outlook , seeking to diversify the economy away from over-reliance on bananas and boosting the tourism sector . Compton was also a keen advocate of regional integration .
Anthony remained in power until 2006 when the UWP , again led by Compton , 2006 Saint Lucian general election of parliament . Compton pledged to boost the economy and tackle the rising crime rate . Police attempts to curb crime were criticised in 2015 when it emerged that several suspects had been unlawfully shot by police and the circumstances of their deaths covered up . In May 2007 , after Compton suffered a series of small strokes , Finance and External Affairs Minister Stephenson King became acting prime minister and succeeded Compton as Prime Minister when the latter died in September 2007 . In November 2011 , Kenny Anthony was 2011 Saint Lucian general election re-elected as prime minister for a third time . In the 2016 Saint Lucian general election the United Worker 's Party ( UWP ) assumed power again , with Allen Chastanet becoming prime minister .
==Geography==
The volcano island of Saint Lucia is more mountainous than most Caribbean islands , with the highest point being Mount Gimie , at above sea level . Two other mountains , the Pitons , form the island 's most famous landmark . They are located between Soufrire , Saint Lucia and Choiseul , Saint Lucia on the western side of the island . Saint Lucia is the only island in the world that contains a drive-in volcano . Forests cover about 77 % of the land area .
There are a number of List of Caribbean islands # Saint Lucia off the coast , the largest of which are the Maria Islands , St Lucia in the south-east .
The capital city of Saint Lucia is Castries ( population 60,263 ) where 32.4 % of the population lives . Other major towns include Gros Islet , Soufrire , Saint Lucia , and Vieux Fort . The population tends to be concentrated around the coast , with the interior more sparsely populated , due to the presence of dense forests .
===Climate===
The local climate is tropical climate , specifically a tropical rainforest climate ( Af ) under the Kppen climate classification , moderated by northeast trade winds , with a dry season from 1 December to 31 May , and a wet season from 1 June to 30 November ( referred to by locals as the hurricane season ) .
Average daytime temperatures are around , and average nighttime temperatures are around . Since it is fairly close to the equator , the temperature does not fluctuate much between winter and summer . Average annual rainfall ranges from on the coast to in the mountain rainforests .
===Flora and fauna===
Saint Lucia contains five terrestrial ecoregions : Windward Islands moist forests , Leeward Islands dry forests , Windward Islands dry forests , Windward Islands xeric scrub , and Lesser Antilles mangroves . It had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 6.17/10 , ranking it 84th globally out of 172 countries .
A species of lizard , Anolis luciae , is named for and is Endemism to Saint Lucia .
==Geology==
The geology of St. Lucia can be described as composing three main areas . The oldest , 1618 Megaannum , volcanic rocks are exposed from Castries northward and consist of eroded basalt and andesite centres . The middle , central highlands , portion of the island consists of dissected andesite centres , 10.4 to 1 Mya , while the lower southwest portion of the island contains recent activity from the Soufriere Volcanic Centre ( SVC ) . This SVC , centered about the Qualibou caldera , contains pyroclastic flow deposits , lava flows , intrusive rock , block and ash flow deposits , and volcanic crater . This depression 's perimeter includes the town of Soufriere , Mount Tabac , Mt . Gimie , Morne Bonin , and Gros Piton . At in diameter , though the western portion is open towards the Grenada basin ( geology ) , the depression formed as recently as 100 kya . The depression is noted for its geothermal gradient , especially at Sulphur Springs , Saint Lucia and Soufrire Estates , a phreatic eruption in 1776 , and recent seismic activity ( 20002001 ) .
Eroded andesitic stratovolcanoes to the north east of the depression include Mt . Gimie , Piton St Esprit , and Mt . Grand Magazin , all greater than 1 Ma in age . Andesitic and dacite pyroclastic flows from these volcanoes are found at Morne Tabac dome ( 532 kiloannus ) , Morne Bonin dome ( 273 kya ) , and Bellevue ( 264 kya ) . Avalanche deposits from the formation of the Qualibou depression are found offshore , and in the massive blocks of Rabot , Pleisance , and Coubaril . The dacitic domes of Petit Piton ( 109 kya ) and Gros Piton ( 71 kya ) were then extrusive rock onto the depression floor accompanied by the Anse John ( 104 kya ) and La Pointe ( 59.8 kya ) pyroclastic flows . Later , pyroclastic flows include pumice-rich Belfond and Anse Noir ( 20 kya ) . Finally , the dacitic domes of Terre Blanche ( 15.3 kya ) and Belfond ( 13.6 kya ) formed within the depression .
==Government==
Saint Lucia is a Commonwealth realm . Elizabeth II is Monarchy of Saint Lucia , represented on the island by a Governor-General of Saint Lucia governor-general . The Prime Minister of Saint Lucia is normally the head of the party commanding the support of the majority of the members of the House of Assembly of Saint Lucia , which has 17 seats . The other chamber of Parliament of Saint Lucia , the Senate of Saint Lucia , has eleven appointed members .
Saint Lucia is a two-party parliamentary democracy . Three political parties participated in the 6 June 2016 General Election . The United Workers Party ( Saint Lucia ) , led by Allen Chastanet , won eleven of the seventeen seats .
===Foreign relations===
Saint Lucia maintains friendly relations with the major powers active in the Caribbean , including the United States , the United Kingdom , Canada , and France . Saint Lucia has no current international disputes .
Saint Lucia is a full and participating member of the Caribbean Community Caribbean Community ( CARICOM ) , Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States ( OECS ) , and La Francophonie . Saint Lucia is a Commonwealth Realm .
Saint Lucia became the 152nd member of the United Nations on 9 December 1979 . As of January 2018 , Cosmos Richardson , who presented his credentials on 22 February 2017 , was Saint Lucia 's representative to the United Nations .
===Organisation of American States ( OAS ) ===
The Charter of the OAS was signed in Bogota in 1948 and was amended by several protocols which were named after the city and the year in which the protocol was signed , such as Managua in 1993 forming part of the name of the protocol .
Saint Lucia entered the OAS system on 22 February 1979.
===Agreements which impact on financial relationships===
====The Double Taxation Relief ( CARICOM ) Treaty 1994====
At a CARICOM Meeting , the representative of St. Lucia , John Compton signed The Double Taxation Relief ( CARICOM ) Treaty 1994 on 6 July 1994.
The representatives of seven CARICOM countries signed similar agreements at Sherbourne Conference Centre , St. Michael , Barbados . The countries whose representatives signed the treaties in Barbados were Antigua and Barbuda , Belize , Grenada , Jamaica , St. Kitts and Nevis , St. Vincent and the Grenadines , and Trinidad and Tobago .
This treaty covered taxes , residence , tax jurisdictions , capital gains , business profits , interest , dividends , royalties and other areas .
====FATCA====
On 30 June 2014 , Saint Lucia signed a Model 1 agreement with the United States of America in relation to Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act ( FATCA ) . As of 1 September 2016 , the status of the agreement is listed as `` in force '' .
Preceding the 2014 FATCA agreement is one which was entered into on 30 January 1987 between the United States of America and Saint Lucia according to Paragraph 2 of the Model 1 agreement , the purpose of which was to exchange tax Information .
===Military===
Saint Lucia has no regular military force . A Special Service Unit ( SSU ) and the Coast Guard are both under the command of the Royal Saint Lucia Police . Although the SSU is under the RSLPF ( Royal Saint Lucia Police Force ) , they are called in as the last line of defense or for more severe cases .
In 2018 , Saint Lucia signed the UN treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons .
===Administrative divisions===
The districts of the island , established by the French colonial government and continued by the British , are :
* Anse la Raye Quarter , 31.0 ; km2
* Canaries Quarter
* Castries Quarter , 79.5 ; km2
* Choiseul Quarter , 31.3 ; km2
* Dauphin Quarter
* Dennery Quarter , 69.7 ; km2
* Gros Islet Quarter
* Laborie Quarter , 37.8 ; km2
* Micoud Quarter , 77.7 ; km2
* Soufrire Quarter , 50.5 ; km2
* Vieux Fort Quarter , 43.8 ; km
An additional area is the Forest Reserve Area Quarter ( 78.3 ; km2 ) .
==Economy==
The United Nations categorizes Saint Lucia as a Small Island Developing States , a designation similar to a developing country with a few substantial differences due to Saint Lucia 's island nature . The tertiary sector of the economy accounted for 82.8 % of GDP , followed by Industrial sector and agriculture at 14.2 % and 2.9 % , respectively .
An educated workforce and improvements in roads , communications , water supply , sewerage , and port facilities have attracted foreign investment in tourism and in petroleum storage and transshipment . However , with the US , Canada , and Europe in recession , tourism declined by double digits in early 2009 . The recent change in the European Union import preference regime and the increased competition from Latin American bananas have made economic diversification increasingly important in Saint Lucia .
Saint Lucia has been able to attract foreign business and investment , especially in its offshore banking and tourism industries , which is Saint Lucia 's main source of revenue . The manufacturing sector is the most diverse in the Eastern Caribbean area , and the government is trying to revitalise the banana industry . Despite negative growth in 2011 , economic fundamentals remain solid , and GDP growth should recover in the future .
Inflation has been relatively low , averaging 5.5 percent between 2006 and 2008 . Saint Lucia 's currency is the East Caribbean Dollar ( EC $ ) , a regional currency shared among members of the Eastern Caribbean Currency Union ( ECU ) . The Eastern Caribbean Central Bank ( ECCL ) issues the EC $ , manages monetary policy , and regulates and supervises commercial banking activities in member countries . In 2003 , the government began a comprehensive restructuring of the economy , including elimination of price controls and privatization of the state banana company .
===Tourism===
Tourism is vital to Saint Lucia 's economy . Its economic importance is expected to continue to increase as the market for bananas have become more competitive . Tourism tends to be more substantial during the dry season ( January to April ) , often referred to as the tourist season . Saint Lucia tends to be popular due to its tropical weather and scenery and its beaches and resorts .
Other tourist attractions include a drive-in volcano , Sulphur Springs , Saint Lucia ( in Soufrire ) , zip lining in at Sault Falls , Dennery , the St Lucia Botanical Gardens , the Majestic twin Peaks `` The Pitons '' , a world heritage site , the rain forests , several options of boat trips , Frigate Island Nature Reserve ( Operated by the St. Lucia National Trust ) , Dennery , and Pigeon Island National Park , which is home to Fort Rodney , an old British military base .
The majority of tourists visit Saint Lucia as part of a cruise . Most of their time tends to be spent in Castries , although Soufrire , Saint Lucia , Marigot Bay , Rodney Bay and Gros Islet are also tourist destinations .
The current Minister of Tourism is Dominic Fedee , he has been in his role since 2016.
==Demographics==
Saint Lucia reported a population of 165,595 in the 2010 national census . In , the United Nations Population Division estimated Saint Lucia 's population at . The country 's population is evenly divided between urban and rural areas , with more than a third living in the capital , Castries .
Despite a high emigration rate , the population is growing rapidly at about 1.2 % per year . Migration from Saint Lucia is primarily to English-speaking world countries , with the United Kingdom having almost 10,000 Saint Lucian-born citizens , and over 30,000 of Saint Lucian heritage . The second most popular destination for Saint Lucian migrs is the United States , where a combined ( foreign and national-born Saint Lucians ) almost 14,000 reside . Canada is home to a few thousand Saint Lucians .
===Ethnic groups===
Saint Lucia 's population is predominantly of African and mixed African-European-Carib descent , with a small Indo-Caribbean minority ( 3 % ) . Members of other or unspecified ethnic groups , account for about 2 % of the population .
===Languages===
The official language is English . Saint Lucian French Creole ( Kwyl ) , which is colloquially referred to as Patois ( `` Patwa '' ) , is spoken by 95 % of the population . This Antillean Creole is used in literature and music , and is gaining official acknowledgement . As it developed during the early period of French colonisation , the creole is derived chiefly from French and West African languages , with some vocabulary from the Island Carib language and other sources . Antillean Creole is also spoken in Dominica , Martinique , Guadeloupe , and ( to a lesser extent ) St. Vincent and Grenada ; it also resembles the creoles spoken in French Guiana , Haiti , Mauritius and the Seychelles . Saint Lucia is a member of La Francophonie .
===Religion===
Christianity is the main religion in Saint Lucia . About 61.5 % of the population is Roman Catholic . Another 25.5 % belong to Protestant denominations , ( includes Seventh Day Adventist 10.4 % , Pentecostal 8.9 % , Baptist 2.2 % , Anglican 1.6 % , Church of God 1.5 % , other Protestant 0.9 % ) . Evangelicals comprise 2.3 % of the population and 1.1 % are Jehovah 's Witnesses . In addition , about 1.9 % of the population adheres to the Rastafari movement . Other religions include Islam , Bah '  Faith , Judaism , and Buddhism .
===Health===
See Health in Saint Lucia
===Crime===
In 2017 , Saint Lucia recorded 60 homicides , the highest in the country 's history .
==Culture==
The culture of Saint Lucia has been influenced by African , East Indian , French , and English heritage . One of the secondary languages is Saint Lucian French Creole , spoken by almost all of the population .
Saint Lucia boasts the second highest ratio of Nobel Prize laureates produced with respect to the total population of any sovereign country in the world . Two winners have come from Saint Lucia : William Arthur Lewis ( economist ) won the Bank of Sweden Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel in 1979 , and the poet Derek Walcott received the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1992.
===Festivals===
Saint Lucian cultural festivals include La Woz celebrated on August 30th and La Magwit on October 17th , the first representing a native Saint Lucian fraternal society known as the Order of the Rose that is fashioned in the mould of Rosicrucianism , and the second representing its traditional rival , the native Saint Lucian equivalent of Freemasonry known as the Order of the Marguerite . References to their origins as versions of pre-existing external secret societies can be seen in a mural painted by Dunstan St Omer , depicting the holy trinity of Osiris , Horus , and Isis .
The biggest festival of the year is the Saint Lucia Jazz Festival . Held in early May at multiple venues throughout the island , it draws visitors and musicians from around the world . The grand finale or main stage is held at the Pigeon Island Island National Landmark ( Saint Lucia ) which is located to the North of the Island .
Traditionally in common with other Caribbean countries , Saint Lucia held a carnival before Lent . In 1999 , the government moved Carnival to mid-July to avoid competing with the much larger Trinidad and Tobago carnival and so as to attract more overseas visitors .
In May 2009 , Saint Lucians commemorated the 150th Anniversary of West Indian Heritage on the island .
===Sport===
The Windward Islands cricket team includes players from Saint Lucia and plays in the Regional Four Day Competition . Daren Sammy became the first Saint Lucian to represent the West Indies cricket team on his debut in 2007 , and since 2010 has captained the side . In an international career spanning 2003 to 2008 , and including 41 ODIs and one Test , Nadine George MBE became the first woman to score a Test century for the team . Sammy and George were recognised by the Saint Lucian government as Sportsman of the Year and Sportswoman of the Year respectively for 2004.
For sailing enthusiasts , the annual Atlantic Rally for Cruisers ( ARC ) race begins in the Canary Islands and ends in Saint Lucia . The year 2015 marked the ARC 's 30th year of existence . Every November , the race attracts over 200 boats and 1,200 people to sail across the Atlantic to the Caribbean .
In 2019 a modern state of the art horse racing facility opened . One of the main contributors will be The China Horse Club , operators of race tracks in Asia .
===Music and dance===
Together with Caribbean music genres such as Calypso music , soca music , Dancehall , Reggae , Compas , Zouk ( musical movement ) , and Salsa music , Saint Lucia has a strong indigenous folk music tradition . Each May since 1991 , Saint Lucia has hosted an internationally renowned Saint Lucia Jazz Festival . In 2013 , the festival was re-branded The Saint Lucia Jazz & Arts Festival which encompassed culture , visual art , alternative music , education , fashion , and food .
Dancing in Saint Lucia is inspired by Caribbean culture and enjoys an active following . A popular folk dance is the Kwadril .
===Cinema===
Caribbean Cinemas operates in Saint Lucia . The cinema is located at Choc Estate in Castries . There is also a Bank of St. Lucia ATM , Domino 's Pizza outlet , & a cafe [ Rituals Coffee Shop ] near the Cinema .
Much of the scenery for the film Dr. Dolittle ( film ) Dr. Dolittle was shot in Saint Lucia in 1967 . Water ( 1985 film ) was shot on the island , as were parts of Firepower ( film ) .
===Education===
The Education Act provides for free and compulsory education in Saint Lucia from the ages of 5 to 15 . Public spending on education was at 5.8 % among the 20022005 GDP .
Saint Lucia has a community college ( Sir Arthur Lewis Community College ) , one university campus operated by the University of the West Indies Open Campus , and a few medical schools  American International Medical University , International American University  College of Medicine , Destiny University School of Medicine and Health Sciences , and the oldest of which is Spartan Health Sciences University .
Monroe College , a private for-profit college and graduate school based in New York City , established a campus in Saint Lucia in 2007.
===Cuisine===
Saint Lucia 's national dish is green figs and saltfish .
The island 's cuisine is a unique blend of West African , European ( mainly British and French ) and Indian cuisine ; this creates dynamic meal dishes such as macaroni pie , Stew chicken , rice and peas , fish broth or fish water , and soups packed full with fresh locally produced vegetables . Typical essential foodstuffs are potatoes , onions , celery , thyme , coconut milk , the very hot Scotch bonnet , flour , and cornmeal . All mainstream meat and poultry are eaten in St. Lucia ; meat and seafood are normally stewed and browned to create a rich gravy sometimes served over ground provisions or rice . The island is also home to the famous fried dough , known by many as a bake or Johnny Cake . These bakes can be served with different sides , such as saltfish which is either sauted or lightly fried along with red , green peppers , onions , and seasoned well . This is the most common way for bake to be prepared , though it can also be served with meats such as stewed chicken or beef .
One popular Saint Lucian dessert is the pastry called a turnover . The pastry is made with sweetened coconut that is boiled with spices , some sugar , and whatever is satisfying . It is boiled until cooked to a light or dark brown colour ; then the mixture is separated into various size portions placed on a rolled out piece of dough . The dough size may vary too depending on how much is desired , and lastly , it is baked in the oven until the colour of the turnover is nicely browned .
Due to Saint Lucia 's Indo-Caribbean population , curry is very popular ; however due to the blend of cooking styles , curry dishes have a distinct Caribbean twist . Roti is typically served as a fast food meal : the bread itself is very flat ( sometimes very thin ) and is wrapped around curried vegetables such as chickpeas and potato , seafood such as shrimp and conch , or meats such as chicken , beef , goat , and liver .
===LGBTQ non-acceptance===
LGBT rights in Saint Lucia Lesbian , gay , bisexual , and transgender ( LGBT ) people living in Saint Lucia face legal challenges not experienced by non-LGBT members of the population . Saint Lucia prohibits male-on-male sexual activity , punishing those found guilty with 10 years in jail however the law is not enforced . Saint Lucia was also the only UN member in the Americas to formally oppose the UN declaration on sexual orientation and gender identity .
==Gallery==
File : Toraille Waterfall.JPG Toraille Waterfall  July 2016
File : GrosPiton.JPG Gros Piton seen from the Ladera Hotel restaurant  September 2007
File : PetitPiton.JPG Petit Piton seen from the Ladera Hotel restaurant  December 2004
File : MarigoldBay.jpg Soufrire Bay  February 2006
File : saint lucia mountain resort.JPG Aerial view of resort  June 2006
File : Day248bdrivem.JPG Typical sight in Canaries , Saint Lucia : houses on hills , June 2006
File : AtlanticBeach.jpg St Lucia beach  February 2006
File : St lucia z.jpg View from the Le Sport ; resort  March 2006
File : Day248bdriveq.JPG A view of Soufrire , Saint Lucia
==See also==
* Outline of Saint Lucia
* List of colonial governors and administrators of Saint Lucia
* Governor-General of Saint Lucia
* Index of Saint Lucia-related articles
* British African-Caribbean people
* Windward Islands
* LGBT rights in Saint Lucia
* Chief Justice of the Leeward Islands
* List of Saint Lucians
* List of newspapers in Saint Lucia
==References==
===Citations===
===Sources===
*
* `` The Saint Lucia Constitution '' ( 1978-December-20 effective 1979-February-22 ) , Government of St. Lucia , 2008 , stlucia.gov.lc , webpage : The Saint Lucia Constitution Order 1978.
* `` Members of the House of Assembly '' ( and Prime Minister ) , Government of St. Lucia , 2008 , stlucia.gov.lc , webpage : stlucia.gov.lc/govfolks-members .
==External links==
* Saint Lucia . The World Factbook . Central Intelligence Agency .
* Saint Lucia from UCB Libraries GovPubs
*
* St. Lucia from the BBC News
*
* Key Development Forecasts for Saint Lucia from International Futures
* Guide to the island of St. Lucia
Category : Saint Lucia
Category : Countries in the Caribbean
Category : Windward Islands
Category : English-speaking countries and territories
Category : Islands of Saint Lucia
Category : Island countries
Category : Member states of the Caribbean Community
Category : Member states of the Commonwealth of Nations
Category : Member states of the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States
Category : Member states of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie
Category : Member states of the United Nations
Category : Small Island Developing States
Category : Former colonies in North America
Category : British Windward Islands
Category : French Caribbean
Category:1800s establishments in the Caribbean
Category:1803 establishments in North America
Category:1803 establishments in the British Empire
Category : States and territories established in 1979
Category:1970s establishments in the Caribbean
Category:1979 establishments in North America
Category : Countries in North America <article_end> <article_start>  
Haiti ( ; Hati ; Ayiti ) , officially the Republic of Haiti ( Rpublique d'Hati links=no ; Repiblik d Ayiti links=no ) and formerly known as Hayti , is a country located on the island of Hispaniola in the Greater Antilles archipelago of the Caribbean Sea , to the east of Cuba and Jamaica and south of The Bahamas and the Turks and Caicos Islands . It occupies the western three-eighths of the island which it shares with the Dominican Republic . To its south-west lies the small island of Navassa Island , which is claimed by Haiti but is disputed as a United States United States Minor Outlying Islands under federal administration . Haiti is in size , the third largest country in the Caribbean by area , and has an estimated population of 11.4 million , making it the most populous country in the Caribbean .
The island was originally inhabited by the indigenous Tano people , who migrated from South America . The first Europeans arrived on 5 December 1492 during the Christopher Columbus # First voyage of Christopher Columbus , who initially believed he had found India or China . Columbus subsequently founded the first European settlement in the Americas , La Navidad , on what is now the northeastern coast of Haiti . The island was claimed by Spanish Empire and named La Espaola , forming part of the Spanish Empire until the early 17th century . However , competing claims and settlements by the French led to the western portion of the island being Peace of Ryswick in 1697 , which was subsequently named Saint-Domingue . French colonists established lucrative sugarcane Sugar plantations in the Caribbean , worked by vast numbers of slaves brought from Africa , which made the colony one of the richest in the world .
In the midst of the French Revolution ( 178999 ) , slaves and free people of color launched the Haitian Revolution ( 17911804 ) , led by a former slave and the first black general of the French Army , Toussaint Louverture . After 12 years of conflict , Napoleon Bonaparte 's forces were defeated by Louverture 's successor , Jean-Jacques Dessalines ( later Emperor Jacques I ) , who declared Haiti 's sovereignty on 1 January 1804the first independent Nation state of Latin America and the Caribbean , the second republic in the Americas , the first country to abolish slavery , and the only state in history established by a successful Slave rebellion . Apart from Alexandre Ption , the first President of the Republic , all of Haiti 's first leaders were former slaves . After a brief period in which the country was split in two , President Jean-Pierre Boyer united the country and then attempted to bring the whole of Hispaniola under Haitian control , precipitating a long series of wars that ended in the 1870s when Haiti formally recognized the independence of the Dominican Republic . Haiti 's first century of independence was characterized by political instability , ostracism by the international community and the payment of a crippling debt to France . Political volatility and foreign economic influence in the country prompted the U.S. to occupy the country from 1915 to 1934 . Following a series of short-lived presidencies , Franois Duvalier Franois 'Papa Doc ' Duvalier took power in 1956 , ushering in a long period of autocratic rule that was continued by his son Jean-Claude Duvalier Jean-Claude 'Baby Doc ' Duvalier that lasted until 1986 ; the period was characterized by state-sanctioned violence against the opposition and civilians , corruption , and economic stagnation . Since 1986 Haiti has been attempting to establish a more democratic political system .
Haiti is a founding member of the United Nations , Organization of American States ( OAS ) , Association of Caribbean States , and the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie . In addition to CARICOM , it is a member of the International Monetary Fund , World Trade Organization , and the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States . Historically poor and politically unstable , Haiti has the lowest List of countries by Human Development Index in the Americas . Since the turn of the 21st century , the country has endured a 2004 Haitian coup d'tat coup d'tat , which prompted a United Nations Stabilisation Mission in Haiti U.N. intervention , as well as 2010 Haiti earthquake that killed over 250,000.
==Etymology==
The name Haiti ( or Hayti ) comes from the indigenous Tano language which was the native name given to the entire island of Hispaniola to mean , `` land of high mountains . '' The h is silent in French and the  in Hati has a Diaeresis ( diacritic ) # French used to show that the second vowel is pronounced separately , as in the word nave . In English , this rule for the pronunciation is often disregarded , thus the spelling Haiti is used . There are different anglicizations for its pronunciation such as HIGH-ti , high-EE-ti and haa-EE-ti , which are still in use , but HAY-ti is the most widespread and best-established . The name was restored by Haitian revolutionary Jean-Jacques Dessalines as the official name of independent Saint-Domingue , as a tribute to the Amerindian predecessors .
In French , Haiti 's nickname is the `` Pearl of the Antilles '' ( La Perle des Antilles ) because of both its natural beauty , and the amount of wealth it accumulated for the Kingdom of France ; during the 18th century the colony was the world 's leading producer of sugar and coffee .
==History==
===Pre-Columbian history===
The island of Hispaniola , of which Haiti occupies the western three-eighths , has been inhabited since about 5000 BC by groups of Native Americans thought to have arrived from Central or South America . Genetic studies show that some of these groups were related to the Yanomami of the Amazon Basin . Amongst these early settlers were the Ciboney peoples , followed by the Tano people , speakers of an Arawakan Tano language , elements of which have been preserved in Haitian Creole . The Tano name for the entire island was Haiti , or alternatively Quisqeya .
In Tano society the largest unit of political organization was led by a cacique , or chief , as the Europeans understood them . The island of Hipaniola was divided among five 'caciquedoms ' : the Magua in the north east , the Marien in the north west , the Jaragua in the south west , the Maguana in the central regions of Cibao , and the Higey in the south east .
Tano cultural artifacts include cave paintings in several locations in the country . These have become national symbols of Haiti and tourist attractions . Modern-day Logne , started as a French colonial town in the southwest , is beside the former capital of the caciquedom of Xaragua .
===Colonial era===
====Spanish rule ( 14921625 ) ====
Navigator Christopher Columbus landed in Haiti on 6 December 1492 , in an area that he named Mle-Saint-Nicolas , and claimed the island for the Crown of Castile . Nineteen days later , his ship the Santa Mara ( ship ) ran aground near the present site of Cap-Hatien . Columbus left 39 men on the island , who founded the settlement of La Navidad on 25 December 1492 . Relations with the native peoples , initially good , broke down and the settlers were later killed by the Tano .
The sailors carried endemic Eurasian infectious diseases to which the native peoples lacked immunity ( medical ) , causing them to die in great numbers in epidemics . The first recorded smallpox epidemic in the Americas erupted on Hispaniola in 1507 . Their numbers were further reduced by the harshness of the encomienda system , in which the Spanish forced natives to work in gold mines and plantations .
The Spanish passed the Laws of Burgos Laws of Burgos , 151213 , which forbade the maltreatment of natives , endorsed their Proselytism to Catholicism , and gave legal framework to encomiendas . The natives were brought to these sites to work in specific plantations or industries .
As the Spanish re-focused their colonization efforts on the greater riches of mainland Central and South America , Hispaniola became reduced largely to a trading and refueling post . As a result Piracy in the Caribbean became widespread , encouraged by European powers hostile to Spain such as France ( based on Tortuga ( Haiti ) ) and England . The Spanish largely abandoned the western third of the island , focusing their colonization effort on the eastern two-thirds . The western part of the island was thus gradually settled by French buccaneers ; among them was Bertrand d'Ogeron , who succeeded in growing tobacco and recruited many French colonial families from Martinique and Guadeloupe . In 1697 Kingdom of France and Imperial Spain settled their hostilities on the island by way of the Treaty of Ryswick of 1697 , which divided Hispaniola between them .
====French rule ( 16251804 ) ====
France received the western third and subsequently named it Saint-Domingue , the French equivalent of Captaincy General of Santo Domingo , the Spanish colony on Hispaniola . The French set about creating sugar and coffee plantations , worked by vast numbers of slaves imported from Africa , and Saint-Domingue grew to become their richest colonial possession .
The French settlers were outnumbered by slaves by almost 10 to 1 . According to the 1788 Census , Haiti 's population consisted of nearly 25,000 Europeans , 22,000 free coloreds and 700,000 African slaves . In contrast , by 1763 the white population of New France , a far larger territory , had numbered only 65,000 . In the north of the island , slaves were able to retain many ties to African cultures , religion and language ; these ties were continually being renewed by newly imported Africans . Some West African slaves held on to their traditional Haitian Vodou beliefs by secretly syncretizing it with Catholicism .
The French enacted the Code Noir ( `` Black Code '' ) , prepared by Jean-Baptiste Colbert and ratified by Louis XIV , which established rules on slave treatment and permissible freedoms . Saint-Domingue has been described as one of the most brutally efficient slave colonies ; one-third of newly imported Africans died within a few years . Many slaves died from diseases such as smallpox and typhoid fever . They had low birth rates , and there is evidence that some women abortion fetuses rather than give birth to children within the bonds of slavery . The colony 's environment also suffered , as forests were cleared to make way for plantations and the land was overworked so as to extract maximum profit for French plantation owners .
As in its Louisiana ( New France ) , the New France government allowed some rights to free people of color ( gens de couleur ) , the mixed-race descendants of European male colonists and African female slaves ( and later , mixed-race women ) . Over time , many were released from slavery and they established a separate social class . White French Creole peoples fathers frequently sent their mixed-race sons to France for their education . Some men of color were admitted into the military . More of the free people of color lived in the south of the island , near Port-au-Prince , and many intermarried within their community . They frequently worked as artisans and tradesmen , and began to own some property , including slaves of their own . The free people of color petitioned the New France government to expand their rights .
The brutality of slave life led many slaves to escape to mountainous regions , where they set up their own autonomous communities and became known as Maroon ( people ) . One Maroon leader , Franois Mackandal , led a rebellion in the 1750s , however he was later captured and executed by the French .
====Haitian Revolution ( 17911804 ) ====
Inspired by the French Revolution of 1789 and principles of the rights of man , the French settlers and free people of color pressed for greater political freedom and more civil rights . Tensions between these two groups led to conflict , as a militia of free-coloreds was set up in 1790 by Vincent Og , resulting in his capture , torture and execution . Sensing an opportunity , in August 1791 the first slave armies were established in northern Haiti under the leadership of Toussaint Louverture inspired by the Vodou houngan ( priest ) Boukman , and backed by the Spanish in Santo Domingo  soon a full-blown slave rebellion had broken out across the entire colony .
In 1792 , the French First Republic government sent three commissioners with troops to re-establish control ; to build an alliance with the gens de couleur and slaves commissioners Lger-Flicit Sonthonax and tienne Polverel abolished slavery in the colony . Six months later , the National Convention , led by Maximilien de Robespierre and the Jacobin Club , endorsed abolition of slavery timeline and extended it to all the French colonies .
Political leaders in the United States , which was a new republic itself , reacted with ambivalence , at times providing aid to enable Planter ( plantation owner ) to put down the revolt . Later in the revolution , the US provided support to native Haitian military forces , with the goal of reducing French influence in North America and the Caribbean .
With slavery abolished , Toussaint Louverture pledged allegiance to France , and he fought off the British and Spanish forces who had taken advantage of the situation and invaded Saint-Domingue . The Spanish were later forced to cede their part of the island to France under the terms of the Peace of Basel in 1795 , uniting the island under one government . However an insurgency against French rule broke out in the east , and in the west there was fighting between Louverture 's forces and the free people of color led by Andr Rigaud in the War of the Knives ( 17991800 ) . Many surviving free people of color left the island as refugees .
After Louverture created a separatist constitution and proclaimed himself governor-general for life , Napolon Bonaparte in 1802 sent an expedition of 20,000 soldiers and as many sailors under the command of his brother-in-law , Charles Leclerc ( general , born 1772 ) , to reassert French control . The French achieved some victories , but within a few months most of their French Army had died from yellow fever . Ultimately more than 50,000 French troops died in an attempt to retake the colony , including 18 generals . The French managed to capture Louverture , transporting him to France for trial . He was imprisoned at Fort de Joux , where he died in 1803 of exposure and possibly tuberculosis .
The slaves , along with free gens de couleur and allies , continued their fight for independence , led by generals Jean-Jacques Dessalines , Alexandre Ption and Henry Christophe . The rebels finally managed to decisively defeat the French troops at the Battle of Vertires on 18 November 1803 , leading the first ever nation to successfully gain independence through a slave revolt . Under the overall command of Dessalines , the Haitian armies avoided open battle , and instead conducted a successful guerrilla campaign against the Napoleonic forces , working with diseases such as yellow fever to reduce the numbers of French soldiers . Later that year France withdrew its remaining 7,000 troops from the island and Napoleon gave up his idea of re-establishing a North American empire , selling Louisiana ( New France ) to the United States , in the Louisiana Purchase . It has been estimated that between 24,000 and 100,000 Europeans , and between 100,000 and 350,000 Haitian ex-slaves , died in the revolution . In the process , Dessalines became arguably the most successful military commander in the struggle against Napoleonic France .
===Independent Haiti===
====First Empire ( 18041806 ) ====
The independence of Saint-Domingue was proclaimed under the native name 'Haiti ' by Dessalines on 1 January 1804 in Gonaves and he was proclaimed `` Emperor for Life '' as Emperor Jacques I by his troops . Dessalines at first offered protection to the white planters and others . However , once in power , he ordered the 1804 Haiti Massacre of nearly all white men , women , children ; between January and April 1804 , 3,000 to 5,000 whites were killed , including those who had been friendly and sympathetic to the black population . Only 1804 Haiti massacre # Aftermath were selected out as exceptions and spared : Polish Haitian soldiers , the majority of whom had deserted from the French army and fought alongside the Haitian rebels ; the small group of German Haitian colonists invited to the Nord-Ouest ( department ) north-west region ; and a group of Doctor of Medicine and professionals . Reportedly , people with connections to officers in the Haitian army were also spared , as well as the women who agreed to marry non-white men .
Fearful of the potential impact the slave rebellion could have in the slave states , U.S. President Thomas Jefferson refused to recognize the new republic . The Southern politicians who were a powerful voting bloc in the American Congress prevented U.S. recognition for decades until they withdrew in 1861 to form the Confederate States of America .
The revolution led to a wave of emigration . In 1809 , 9,000 refugees from Saint-Domingue , both white planters and people of color , settled en masse in New Orleans , doubling the city 's population , having been expelled from their initial refuge in Cuba by Spanish authorities . In addition , the newly arrived slaves added to the city 's African population .
The plantation system was reestablished in Haiti , albeit for wages , however many Haitians were marginalized and resented the heavy-handed manner in which this was enforced in the new nation 's politics . The rebel movement splintered , and Dessalines was assassinated by rivals on 17 October 1806.
====State of Haiti , Kingdom of Haiti and the Republic ( 18061820 ) ====
After Dessalines ' death Haiti became split into two , with the Kingdom of Haiti in the north directed by Henri Christophe , later declaring himself Henri Christophe , and a republic in the south centred on Port-au-Prince , directed by Alexandre Ption , an homme de couleur . Christophe established a semi-feudal corve system , with a rigid education and economic code . Ption 's republic was less absolutist , and he initiated a series of land reforms which benefited the peasant class . President Ption also gave military and financial assistance to the revolutionary leader Simn Bolvar , which were critical in enabling him to liberate the Viceroyalty of New Granada . Meanwhile the French , who had managed to maintain a precarious control of eastern Hispaniola , were Spanish reconquest of Santo Domingo by insurgents led by Juan Snchez Ramrez , with the area returning to Spanish rule in 1809 following the Battle of Palo Hincado .
====Unification of Hispaniola ( 18211844 ) ====
Beginning in 1821 , President Jean-Pierre Boyer , also an homme de couleur and successor to Ption , reunified the island following the suicide of Henry Christophe . After Republic of Spanish Haiti declared its independence from Spain on 30 November 1821 , Boyer invaded , seeking to Unification of Hispaniola by force and ending slavery in Santo Domingo .
Struggling to revive the agricultural economy to produce commodity crops , Boyer passed the Code Rural , which denied peasant laborers the right to leave the land , enter the towns , or start farms or shops of their own , causing much resentment as most peasants wished to have their own farms rather than work on plantations .
The American Colonization Society ( ACS ) encouraged free negro in the United States to emigrate to Haiti . Starting in September 1824 , more than 6,000 African Americans migrated to Haiti , with transportation paid by the ACS . Many found the conditions too harsh and returned to the United States .
In July 1825 , Charles X of France , during a period of restoration of the French monarchy , sent a French Navy to reconquer Haiti . Under pressure , President Boyer agreed to a treaty by which France formally recognized the independence of the nation in exchange for Haiti indemnity controversy of 150 million francs . By an order of 17 April 1826 , the King of France renounced his rights of sovereignty and formally recognized the independence of Haiti . The enforced payments to France hampered Haiti 's economic growth for years , exacerbated by the fact that many Western nations continued to refuse formal Diplomacy recognition to Haiti ; Britain recognized Haitian independence in 1833 , and the United States not until 1862 . Haiti borrowed heavily from Western banks at extremely high interest rates to repay the debt . Although the amount of the reparations was reduced to 90 million in 1838 , by 1900 80 % of the country 's gross domestic product was being spent on debt repayment and the country did not finish repaying it until 1947.
====Loss of the Spanish portion of the island====
After losing the support of Haiti 's elite , Boyer was ousted in 1843 , with Charles Rivire-Hrard replacing him as president . Nationalist Dominican forces in eastern Hispaniola led by Juan Pablo Duarte seized control of Santo Domingo on 27 February 1844 . The Haitian forces , unprepared for a significant uprising , capitulated to the rebels , effectively ending Haitian rule of eastern Hispaniola . In March Rivire-Hrard attempted to reimpose his authority , but the Dominican Republic put up stiff opposition and inflicted heavy losses . Rivire-Hrard was removed from office by the mulatto hierarchy and replaced with the aged general Philippe Guerrier , who assumed the presidency on 3 May 1844.
Guerrier died in April 1845 , and was succeeded by General Jean-Louis Pierrot . Pierrot 's most pressing duty as the new president was to check the incursions of the Dominicans , who were harassing the Haitian troops . Dominican gunboats were also making depredations on Haiti 's coasts . President Pierrot decided to open a campaign against the Dominicans , whom he considered merely as insurgents , however the Haitian offensive of 1845 was stopped on the frontier .
On 1 January 1846 Pierrot announced a fresh campaign to re-imposed Haitian suzerainty over eastern Hispaniola , but his officers and men greeted this fresh summons with contempt . Thus , a month later  February 1846  when Pierrot ordered his troops to march against the Dominicans , the Haitian army mutinied , and its soldiers proclaimed his overthrow as president of the republic . With the war against the Dominicans having become very unpopular in Haiti , it was beyond the power of the new president , General Jean-Baptiste Rich , to stage another invasion .
====Second Empire ( 18491859 ) ====
On 27 February 1847 , President Rich died after only a year in power and was replaced by an obscure officer , General Faustin Soulouque . During the first two years of Soulouque 's administration the conspiracies and opposition he faced in retaining power were so manifold that the Dominicans were given a further breathing space in which to consolidate their independence . But , when in 1848 France finally recognized the Dominican Republic as a free and independent state and provisionally signed a treaty of peace , friendship , commerce and navigation , Haiti immediately protested , claiming the treaty was an attack upon their own security . Soulouque decided to invade the new Republic before the French Government could ratify the treaty .
On 21 March 1849 , Haitian soldiers attacked the Dominican garrison at Las Matas de Farfn . The demoralized defenders offered almost no resistance before abandoning their weapons . Soulouque pressed on , capturing San Juan Province ( Dominican Republic ) . This left only the town of Azua , Dominican Republic as the remaining Dominican stronghold between the Haitian army and the capital . On 6 April , Azua fell to the 18,000-strong Haitian army , with a 5,000-man Dominican counterattack failing to oust them . The way to Santo Domingo was now clear . But the news of discontent existing at Port-au-Prince , which reached Soulouque , arrested his further progress and caused him to return with the army to his capital .
Emboldened by the sudden retreat of the Haitian army , the Dominicans counter-attacked . Their flotilla went as far as Dame-Marie , Grand'Anse Dame-Marie , which they plundered and set on fire . Soulouque , now self-proclaimed as Emperor Faustin I , decided to start a new campaign against them . In 1855 , he again invaded the territory of the Dominican Republic . But owing to insufficient preparation , the army was soon in want of victuals and ammunition . In spite of the bravery of the soldiers , the Emperor had once more to give up the idea of a unified island under Haitian control . After this campaign , Britain and France interfered and obtained an armistice on behalf of the Dominicans , who declared independence as the Dominican Republic .
The sufferings endured by the soldiers during the campaign of 1855 , and the losses and sacrifices inflicted on the country without yielding any compensation or any practical results provoked great discontent . In 1858 a revolution began , led by General Fabre Geffrard , Duke of Tabara . In December of that year , Geffrard defeated the Imperial Army and seized control of most of the country . As a result , the Emperor abdicated his throne on 15 January 1859 . Refused aid by the French Legation , Faustin was taken into exile aboard a British warship on 22 January 1859 , and General Geffrard succeeded him as President .
====Late 19th centuryearly 20th century====
The period following Soulouque 's overthrow down to the turn of the century was a turbulent one for Haiti , with repeated bouts of political instability . President Geffrard was overthrown in a coup in 1867 , as was his successor , Sylvain Salnave , in 1869 . Under the Presidency of Michel Domingue ( 187476 ) relations with the Dominican Republic were dramatically improved by the signing of a treaty , in which both parties acknowledged the independence of the other , bringing an end to Haitian dreams of bringing the entirety of Hispaniola under their control . Some modernisation of the economy and infrastructure also occurred in this period , especially under the Presidencies of Lysius Salomon ( 187988 ) and Florvil Hyppolite ( 188996 ) .
Haiti 's relations with outside powers were often strained . In 1889 the United States attempted to Mle Saint-Nicolas affair to permit the building of a naval base at Mle Saint-Nicolas , which was firmly resisted by President Hyppolite . In 1892 the German Empire supported suppression of the reform movement of Antnor Firmin , and in 1897 , the Germans used gunboat diplomacy to intimidate and then humiliate the Haitian government of President Tirsias Simon Sam ( 18961902 ) during the Lders Affair .
In the first decades of the 20th century , Haiti experienced great political instability and was heavily in debt to France , Germany and the United States . A series of short lived presidencies came and went : President Pierre Nord Alexis was forced from power in 1908 , as was his successor Franois C. Antoine Simon in 1911 ; President Cincinnatus Leconte ( 191112 ) was killed in a ( possibly deliberate ) explosion at the National Palace ; Michel Oreste ( 191314 ) was ousted in a coup , as was his successor Oreste Zamor in 1914.
====United States occupation ( 19151934 ) ====
Germany increased its influence in Haiti in this period , with a small community of German settlers wielding disproportionate influence in Haiti 's economy . The German influence prompted anxieties in the United States , who had also invested heavily in the country , and whose government defended their right to oppose foreign interference in the Americas under the Monroe Doctrine . In December 1914 , the Americans removed $ 500,000 from the Haitian National Bank , but rather than seize it to help pay the debt , it was removed for safe-keeping in New York , thus giving the United States control of the bank and preventing other powers from doing so . This gave a stable financial base on which to build the economy , and so enable the debt to be repaid .
In 1915 , Haiti 's new President Vilbrun Guillaume Sam sought to strengthen his tenuous rule by a mass execution of 167 political prisoners . Outrage at the killings led to riots , and Sam was captured and killed by a lynch mob . Fearing possible foreign intervention , or the emergence of a new government led by the anti-American Haitian politician Rosalvo Bobo , President Woodrow Wilson sent U.S. Marines into Haiti in July 1915 . The , under Rear Admiral William Banks Caperton , arrived in Port-au-Prince in an attempt to restore order and protect U.S. interests . Within days , the Marines had taken control of the capital city and its banks and customs house . The Marines declared martial law and severely censored the press . Within weeks , a new pro-U.S. Haitian president , Philippe Sudr Dartiguenave , was installed and a new constitution written that was favorable to the interests of the United States . The constitution ( written by future US President Franklin D. Roosevelt ) included a clause that allowed , for the first time , foreign ownership of land in Haiti , which was bitterly opposed by the Haitian legislature and citizenry .
The occupation improved some of Haiti 's infrastructure and centralized power in Port-au-Prince . 1700 ; km of roads were made usable , 189 bridges were built , many irrigation canals were rehabilitated , hospitals , schools , and public buildings were constructed , and drinking water was brought to the main cities . Port-au-Prince became the first Caribbean city to have a phone service with automatic dialling . Agricultural education was organized , with a central school of agriculture and 69 farms in the country . However , many infrastructure projects were built using the corve system that allowed the government/occupying forces to take people from their homes and farms , at gunpoint if necessary , to build roads , bridges etc . by force , a process that was deeply resented by ordinary Haitians . Sisal was also introduced to Haiti , and sugarcane and cotton became significant exports , boosting prosperity . Haitian traditionalists , based in rural areas , were highly resistant to United States U.S.-backed changes , while the urban elites , typically mixed-race , welcomed the growing economy , but wanted more political control . Together they helped secure an end to the occupation in 1934 , under the Presidency of Stnio Vincent ( 193041 ) . The debts were still outstanding , though less due to increased prosperity , and the U.S. financial advisor-general receiver handled the budget until 1941.
The U.S. Marines were instilled with a special brand of paternalism towards Haitians `` expressed in the metaphor of a father 's relationship with his children . '' Armed opposition to the US presence was led by the Cacos ( military group ) under the command of Charlemagne Pralte ; his capture and execution in 1919 earned him the status of a national martyr . During Senate hearings in 1921 , the commandant of the Marine Corps reported that , in the 20 months of active unrest , 2,250 Haitians had been killed . However , in a report to the Secretary of the Navy , he reported the death toll as being 3,250 . Haitian historians have claimed the true number was much higher . One went so far as to say , `` the total number of battle victims and casualties of repression and consequences of the war might have reached , by the end of the pacification period , four or five times that  somewhere in the neighborhood of 15,000 persons . '' This is not supported by most historians outside Haiti .
Recognition of the distinctive traditionalism of the Haitian people had an influence on American writers , including Eugene O'Neill , James Weldon Johnson , Langston Hughes , Zora Neale Hurston and Orson Welles .
====Post-occupation era ( 19341957 ) ====
After US forces left in 1934 , Dominican Republic dictator Rafael Trujillo used Antihaitianismo anti-Haitian sentiment as a nationalist tool . In an event that became known as the Parsley massacre , he ordered his army to kill Haitians living on the Dominican side of the border . Few bullets were used  instead , 20,00030,000 Haitians were bludgeoned and bayoneted , then herded into the sea , where sharks finished what Trujillo had begun . Congressman Hamilton Fish III , ranking member of the House Foreign Affairs Committee , called the Parsley Massacre `` the most outrageous atrocity that has ever been perpetrated on the American continent . ''
President Vincent became increasingly dictatorial , and resigned under US pressure in 1941 , being replaced by lie Lescot ( 194146 ) . In 1941 , during the Second World War , Lescot declared war on Empire of Japan ( 8 December ) , Nazi Germany ( 12 December ) , Kingdom of Italy ( 12 December ) , Kingdom of Bulgaria ( 24 December ) , Kingdom of Hungary ( 1920-46 ) ( 24 December ) and Kingdom of Romania ( 24 December ) . Out of these six Axis Powers countries , only Romania reciprocated , declaring war on Haiti on the same day ( 24 December 1941 ) . On 27 September 1945 , Haiti became a member states of the United Nations of the United Nations ( the successor to the Member states of the League of Nations , of which Haiti was also a founding member ) .
In 1946 Lescot was overthrown by the military , with Dumarsais Estim later becoming the new president ( 194650 ) . He sought to improve the economy and education , and to boost the role of black Haitians , however as he sought to consolidate his rule he too was overthrown in a coup led by Paul Magloire , who replaced him as president ( 195056 ) . Firmly anti-Communist , he was supported by the United States ; with greater political stability tourists started to visit Haiti . The waterfront area of Port-au-Prince was redeveloped to allow cruise ship passengers to walk from the docks to cultural attractions . Celebrities such as Truman Capote and Nol Coward visited Haiti ; the era is captured in Graham Greene 's 1966 novel The Comedians ( novel ) .
====Duvalier dynasty ( 19571986 ) ====
In 195657 Haiti underwent severe political turmoil ; Magloire was forced to resign and leave the country in 1956 and he was followed by four short-lived presidencies . In the Haitian presidential election , 1957 Dr. Franois Duvalier was elected President of Haiti . Known as 'Papa Doc ' and initially popular , Duvalier remained President until his death in 1971 . He advanced black interests in the public sector , where over time , people of color had predominated as the educated urban elite . Not trusting the army , despite his frequent purges of officers deemed disloyal , Duvalier created a private militia known as Tonton Macoute ( `` Bogeymen '' ) , which maintained order by terrorizing the populace and political opponents . In 1964 Duvalier proclaimed himself 'President for Life ' ; Jrmie Vespers against his rule that year in Jrmie was violently suppressed , with the ringleaders publicly executed and hundreds of mixed-raced citizens in the town killed . The bulk of the educated and professional class began leaving the country , and corruption became widespread . Duvalier sought to create a personality cult , identifying himself with Baron Samedi , one of the loa , or spirits , of Haitian Vodou . Despite the well-publicized abuses under his rule , Duvalier 's firm anti-Communism earned him the support of the Americans , who furnished the country with aid .
In 1971 Duvalier died , and he was succeeded by his son Jean-Claude Duvalier , nicknamed 'Baby Doc ' , who ruled until 1986 . He largely continued his father 's policies , though curbed some of the worst excesses in order to court international respectability . Tourism , which had nosedived in Papa Doc 's time , again became a growing industry . However as the economy continued to decline Baby Doc 's grip on power began to weaken . Haiti 's pig population was slaughtered following an outbreak of swine fever in the late 1970s , causing hardship to rural communities who used them as an investment . The opposition became more vocal , bolstered by a visit to the country by Pope John Paul II in 1983 , who publicly lambasted the president . Demonstrations occurred in Gonaves in 1985 which then spread across the country ; under pressure from the United States , Duvalier left the country for France in February 1986.
In total , roughly 40,000 to 60,000 Haitians are estimated to have been killed during the reign of the Duvaliers . Through the use of his intimidation tactics and executions , many intellectual Haitians had fled , leaving the country with a massive brain-drain that it has yet to recover from .
====Post-Duvalier era ( 19862004 ) ====
Following Duvalier 's departure , army leader General Henri Namphy headed a new National Council of Government ( Haiti ) . Haitian presidential election , 1987 scheduled for November 1987 were aborted after dozens of inhabitants were shot in the capital by soldiers and Tontons Macoutes . Fraudulent Haitian presidential election , 1988 in 1988 , in which only 4 % of the citizenry voted . The newly elected President , Leslie Manigat , was then overthrown some months later in the June 1988 Haitian coup d'tat . Another September 1988 Haitian coup d'tat in September 1988 , after the St. Jean Bosco massacre in which 1350 people ( estimates vary ) attending a mass led by prominent government critic and Catholic priest Jean-Bertrand Aristide were killed . General Prosper Avril subsequently led a military regime until March 1990.
In December 1990 Jean-Bertrand Aristide was elected President in the Haitian general election , 199091 . However his ambitious reformist agenda worried the elites , and in September of the following year he was overthrown by the military , led by Raoul Cdras , in the 1991 Haitian coup d'tat . Amidst the continuing turmoil many Haitians attempted to flee the country .
In September 1994 , the United States negotiated the departure of Haiti 's military leaders and the peaceful entry of 20,000 US troops under Operation Uphold Democracy . This enabled the restoration of the democratically elected Jean-Bertrand Aristide as president , who returned to Haiti in October to complete his term . As part of the deal Aristide had to implement free market reforms in an attempt to improve the Haitian economy , with mixed results , some sources stating that these reforms had a negative impact on native Haitian industry . In November 1994 , Hurricane Gordon ( 1994 ) brushed Haiti , dumping heavy rain and creating flash flooding that triggered mudslides . Gordon killed an estimated 1,122 people , although some estimates go as high as 2,200.
1995 Haitian general election were held in 1995 which were won by Ren Prval , gaining 88 % of the popular vote , albeit on a low turnout . Aristide subsequently formed his own party , Fanmi Lavalas , and political deadlock ensued ; the Haitian presidential election , 2000 returned Aristide to the presidency with 92 % of the vote . The election had been boycotted by the opposition , then organized into the Convergence Dmocratique , over a dispute in the Haitian legislative election , 2000 . In subsequent years , there was increasing violence between rival political factions and [ rights abuse ] s. Aristide spent years negotiating with the Convergence Dmocratique on new elections , but the Convergence 's inability to develop a sufficient electoral base made elections unattractive .
In 2004 2004 Haitian coup d'tat an anti-Aristide revolt began in northern Haiti . The rebellion eventually reached the capital , and Aristide was forced into exile . The precise nature of the events are disputed ; some , including Aristide and his bodyguard , Franz Gabriel , stated that he was the victim of a `` new coup d'tat or modern kidnapping '' by U.S. forces . Mrs. Aristide stated that the kidnappers wore U.S. Special Forces uniforms , but changed into civilian clothes upon boarding the aircraft that was used to remove Aristide from Haiti . These charges were denied by the US government . As political violence and crime continued to grow , a United Nations Stabilisation Mission in Haiti United Nations Stabilisation Mission ( MINUSTAH ) was brought in to maintain order . However MINUSTAH proved controversial , as their at times heavy-handed approach to maintaining law and order and several instances of abuses , including the alleged sexual abuse of civilians , provoked resentment and distrust amongst ordinary Haitians . Boniface Alexandre assumed interim authority until 2006 , when Ren Prval was re-elected President following Haitian general election , 2006.
====Post-Aristide era ( 2004present ) ====
Amidst the continuing political chaos , a series of natural disasters hit Haiti . In 2004 Hurricane Jeanne # Haiti skimmed the north coast , leaving 3,006 people dead in flooding and mudslides , mostly in the city of Gonaves . In 2008 Haiti was again struck by tropical storms ; Tropical Storm Fay ( 2008 ) , Hurricane Gustav , Hurricane Hanna and Hurricane Ike all produced heavy winds and rain , resulting in 331 deaths and about 800,000 in need of humanitarian aid . The state of affairs produced by these storms was intensified by already high food and fuel prices that had caused a food crisis and political unrest in April 2008.
On 12 January 2010 , at 4:53pm local time , Haiti was struck by a moment magnitude scale-7.0 2010 Haiti earthquake . This was the country 's most severe earthquake in over 200 years . The earthquake was reported to have left between 220,000 and 300,000 people dead and up to 1.6 million homeless .
The situation was exacerbated by a subsequent massive Haiti cholera outbreak that was triggered when cholera-infected waste from a United Nations peacekeeping station contaminated the country 's main river , the Artibonite River . In 2017 , it was reported that roughly 10,000 Haitians had died and nearly a million had been made ill. After years of denial the United Nations apologized in 2016 , but , they have refused to acknowledge fault , thus avoiding financial responsibility .
General elections had been planned for January 2010 but were postponed due to the earthquake . Haitian general election , 201011 for the senate , the parliament and the first round of the presidential elections . The run-off between Michel Martelly and Mirlande Manigat took place on 20 March 2011 , and preliminary results , released on 4 April , named Michel Martelly the winner . In 2011 both former dictator Jean-Claude Duvalier and Jean-Bertrand Aristide returned to Haiti ; attempts to try Duvalier for crimes committed under his rule were shelved following his death in 2014 . In 2013 , Haiti called for European nations to pay reparations for slavery and establish an official commission for the settlement of past wrongdoings . Meanwhile , after continuing political wrangling with the opposition and allegations of electoral fraud , Martelly agreed to step down in 2016 without having a successor in place . An interim president , Jocelerme Privert , then took office . After numerous postponements , partly owing to the effects of another devastating Hurricane Matthew , November 2016 Haitian presidential election were eventually held in November 2016 . The victor , Jovenel Mose of the Haitian Tt Kale Party , was subsequently sworn in as president in 2017 . The 2019 Haitian protests are demonstrations in cities throughout Haiti that began on 7 July 2018 , in response to increased fuel prices . Over time these protests evolved into demands for the resignation of president Mose .
==Geography==
Haiti forms the western three-eighths of Hispaniola , the second largest island in the Greater Antilles . At 27,750 sq km Haiti is the third largest country in the Caribbean behind Cuba and the Dominican Republic , the latter sharing a Dominican RepublicHaiti border with Haiti . The country has a roughly horseshoe shape and because of this it has a disproportionately long coastline , second in length ( ) behind Cuba in the Greater Antilles .
Haiti is the most mountainous nation in the Caribbean , its terrain consists of mountains interspersed with small coastal plains and river valleys . The climate is tropical , with some variation depending on altitude . The highest point is Pic la Selle , at .
The northern region consists of the Massif du Nord ( Northern Massif ) and the Plaine du Nord ( Northern Plain ) . The Massif du Nord is an extension of the Cordillera Central in the Dominican Republic . It begins at Haiti 's eastern border , north of the Guayamouc River , and extends to the northwest through the northern peninsula . The lowlands of the Plaine du Nord lie along the northern border with the Dominican Republic , between the Massif du Nord and the North Atlantic Ocean .
The central region consists of two plains and two sets of mountain ranges . The Plateau Central ( Central Plateau ) extends along both sides of the Guayamouc River , south of the Massif du Nord . It runs from the southeast to the northwest . To the southwest of the Plateau Central are the Montagnes Noires , Haiti , whose most northwestern part merges with the Massif du Nord . Haiti 's most important valley in terms of crops is the Plaine de l'Artibonite , which lies between the Montagnes Noires and the Chane des Matheux . This region supports the country 's ( also Hispaniola 's ) longest river , the Artibonite River Riviere l'Artibonite , which begins in the western region of the Dominican Republic and continues for most of its length through central Haiti , where it then empties into the Gulf of Gonve . Also in this valley lies Haiti 's second largest lake , Lac de Pligre , formed as a result of the construction of the Pligre Dam in the mid-1950s .
The southern region consists of the Plaine du Cul-de-Sac ( the southeast ) and the mountainous southern peninsula ( also known as the Tiburon Peninsula , Haiti ) . The Plaine du Cul-de-Sac is a natural depression that harbors the country 's saline lakes , such as Trou Caman and Haiti 's largest lake , tang Saumatre . The Chane de la Selle mountain range  an extension of the southern mountain chain of the Dominican Republic ( the Sierra de Baoruco )  extends from the Massif de la Selle in the east to the Massif de la Hotte in the west .
Haiti also includes several offshore islands . The island of Tortuga ( Haiti ) ( le de la Tortue ) is located off the coast of northern Haiti . The Arrondissements of Haiti of Gonve Island is located on the island of the same name , in the Gulf of Gonve ; Haiti 's largest island , Gonve is moderately populated by rural villagers . le  Vache ( Cow Island ) is located off the southwest coast ; also part of Haiti are the Cayemites , located in the Gulf of Gonve north of Pestel , Grand'Anse . Navassa Island ( Navassa Island ) , located west of Jrmie on the south west peninsula of Haiti , is subject to an ongoing territorial dispute with the United States , who currently administer the island via the United States Fish and Wildlife Service .
===Climate===
Haiti 's climate is tropical with some variation depending on altitude . Port-au-Prince ranges in January from an average minimum of to an average maximum of ; in July , from . The rainfall pattern is varied , with rain heavier in some of the lowlands and the northern and eastern slopes of the mountains . Haiti 's dry season occurs from November to January .
Port-au-Prince receives an average annual rainfall of . There are two rainy seasons , AprilJune and OctoberNovember . Haiti is subject to periodic droughts and floods , made more severe by deforestation . Hurricanes are a menace , and the country is also prone to drought , flooding and earthquakes .
===Geology===
There are Thrust fault # Blind thrust faults associated with the Enriquillo-Plantain Garden fault zone Enriquillo-Plantain Garden fault system over which Haiti lies . After the earthquake of 2010 , there was no evidence of surface rupture and geologists ' findings were based on seismological , geological and ground deformation data .
The northern boundary of the fault is where the Caribbean plate tectonic plate shifts eastwards by about per year in relation to the North American plate . The strike-slip fault system in the region has two branches in Haiti , the Septentrional-Oriente fault zone Septentrional-Oriente fault in the north and the Enriquillo-Plantain Garden fault in the south .
A 2007 earthquake hazard study , noted that the Enriquillo-Plantain Garden fault zone could be at the end of its seismic cycle and concluded that a worst-case forecast would involve a 7.2 ; Mw earthquake , similar in size to the 1692 Jamaica earthquake . A study team presented a hazard assessment of the Enriquillo-Plantain Garden fault system to the 18th Caribbean Geologic Conference in March 2008 , noting the large strain . The team recommended `` high priority '' historical geologic rupture studies , as the fault was fully locked and had recorded few earthquakes in the preceding 40 ; years . An article published in Haiti 's Le Matin ( Haiti ) newspaper in September 2008 cited comments by geologist Patrick Charles to the effect that there was a high risk of major seismic activity in Port-au-Prince ; and duly the magnitude 7.0 2010 Haiti earthquake happened on this fault zone on 12 January 2010.
Haiti also has rare elements such as gold , which can be found at The Mont Organis gold mining .
===Environment===
The Erosion released from the upper catchments and deforestation have caused periodic and severe flooding in Haiti , as experienced , for example , on 17 September 2004 . Earlier in May that year , floods had killed over 3,000 people on Haiti 's southern border with the Dominican Republic .
Haiti 's forests covered 60 % of the country as recently as 50 years ago , but that has been halved to a current estimate of 30 % tree cover , according to more recent environmental analysis . This estimate poses a stark difference from the erroneous figure of 2 % which has been oft-cited in discourse concerning the country 's environmental condition . Haiti had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 4.01/10 , ranking it 137th globally out of 172 countries .
Scientists at the The Earth Institute # Center for International Earth Science Information Network ( CIESIN ) Earth Institute Columbia University 's Center for International Earth Science Information Network ( CIESIN ) and the United Nations Environment Programme are working on the Haiti Regenerative Initiative an initiative aiming to reduce poverty and natural disaster vulnerability in Haiti through ecosystem restoration and sustainable resource management .
====Biodiversity====
Haiti is home to four ecoregions : Hispaniolan moist forests , Hispaniolan dry forests , Hispaniolan pine forests , and Greater Antilles mangroves .
Despite its small size , Haiti 's mountainous terrain and resultant multiple climactic zones has resulted in a wide variety of plant life . Notable tree species include the breadfruit tree , mango tree , acacia , mahogany , coconut palm , royal palm and Cedrela odorata . The forests were formerly much more extensive , but have been subject to severe deforestation .
Most mammal species are not native , having being brought to the island since colonial times . However there are various native bat species , as well as the endemic Hispaniolan hutia and Hispaniolan solenodon . Various whale and dolphin species can also be found off Haiti 's coast .
There are over 260 species of bird , 31 of these being endemic to Hispaniola . Notable endemic species include the Hispaniolan trogon , Hispaniolan parakeet , grey-crowned tanager and the Hispaniolan Amazon . There are also several Raptor ( bird ) species , as well as pelicans , ibis , hummingbirds and ducks .
Reptiles are common , with species such as the rhinoceros iguana , Chilabothrus fordii , American crocodile and gecko .
==Government and politics==
The government of Haiti is a semi-presidential system semi-presidential republic , a multiparty system wherein the president of Haiti is head of state elected directly by popular elections in Haiti held every five years . The prime minister of Haiti acts as head of government and is appointed by the president , chosen from the majority party in the National Assembly . Executive power is exercised by the president and prime minister who together constitute the government .
Legislative power is vested in both the government and the two chambers of the National Assembly of Haiti , the Senate ( Haiti ) ( Snat ) and the Chamber of Deputies ( Haiti ) ( Chambre des Dputs ) . The government is organized unitary state , thus the central government delegates powers to the departments without a constitutional need for consent . The current structure of Haiti 's political system was set forth in the Constitution of Haiti on 29 March 1987.
Haitian politics have been contentious : since independence , Haiti has suffered 32 List of revolutions and coups d'tat in Haiti . Haiti is the only country in the Western Hemisphere to undergo a successful Haitian Revolution ; however , a long history of oppression by dictators such as Franois Duvalier and his son Jean-Claude Duvalier has markedly affected the nation . Since the end of the Duvalier era Haiti has been transitioning to a democratic system .
=== Administrative divisions ===
Administratively , Haiti is divided into ten Departments of Haiti . The departments are listed below , with the departmental capital cities in parentheses .
# Nord-Ouest ( department ) Nord-Ouest ( Port-de-Paix )
# Nord ( Haitian department ) ( Cap-Hatien )
# Nord-Est ( department ) Nord-Est ( Fort-Libert )
# Artibonite ( department ) ( Gonaves )
# Centre ( department ) ( Hinche )
# Ouest ( department ) ( Port-au-Prince )
# Grand'Anse ( department ) Grand'Anse ( Jrmie )
# Nippes ( Miragone )
# Sud ( department ) ( Les Cayes )
# Sud-Est ( department ) Sud-Est ( Jacmel )
The departments are further divided into 42 Arrondissements of Haiti , 145 Communes of Haiti and 571 communal sections . These serve as , respectively , second- and third-level administrative divisions .
===Foreign relations===
Haiti is a member of a wide range of international and regional organizations , such as the United Nations , CARICOM , Community of Latin American and Caribbean States , International Monetary Fund , Organisation of American States , Organisation internationale de la Francophonie , OPANAL and the World Trade Organization .
In February 2012 , Haiti signaled it would seek to upgrade its observer status to full associate member status of the African Union ( AU ) . The AU was reported to be planning to upgrade Haiti 's status from observer to associate at its June 2013 summit but the application had still not been ratified by May 2016.
===Military===
Haiti 's Ministry of Defense is the main body of the armed forces . The former Armed Forces of Haiti were demobilized in 1995 , however Defence Force of Haiti . The current defense force for Haiti is the Haitian National Police , which has a highly trained SWAT team , and works alongside the Haitian Coast Guard . In 2010 , the Haitian National Police force numbered 7,000.
===Law enforcement and crime===
The legal system is based on a modified version of the Napoleonic Code .
Haiti has consistently ranked among the most corrupt countries in the world on the Corruption Perceptions Index . According to a 2006 report by the Corruption Perceptions Index , there is a strong correlation between corruption and poverty in Haiti . The nation ranked first of all countries surveyed for of levels of perceived domestic corruption . It is estimated that President Jean-Claude Duvalier `` Baby Doc '' Duvalier , his wife Michle Bennett , and their agents stole US $ 504 million from the country 's treasury between 1971 and 1986 . Similarly , after the Haitian Army folded in 1995 , the Haitian National Police ( HNP ) gained sole power of authority on the Haitian citizens . Many Haitians as well as observers of the Haitian society believe that this monopolized power could have given way to a corrupt police force .
Similarly , some media outlets alleged that millions were stolen by former president Jean-Bertrand Aristide . In March 2004 , at the time of Aristide 's kidnapping , a BBC article wrote that the Bush administration State Department stated that Aristide had been involved in drug trafficking . The BBC also described pyramid schemes , in which Haitians lost hundreds of millions in 2002 , as the `` only real economic initiative '' of the Aristide years .
Conversely , according to the 2013 United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime ( UNODC ) report , murder rates in Haiti ( 10.2 per 100,000 ) are far below the regional average ( 26 per 100,000 ) ; less than that of Jamaica ( 39.3 per 100,000 ) and nearly that of the Dominican Republic ( 22.1 per 100,000 ) , making it among the safer countries in the region . In large part , this is due to the country 's ability to fulfil a pledge by increasing its national police yearly by 50 % , a four-year initiative that was started in 2012 . In addition to the yearly recruits , the Haitian National Police ( HNP ) has been using innovative technologies to crack down on crime . A notable bust in recent years led to the dismantlement of the largest kidnapping ring in the country with the use of an advanced software program developed by a United States Military Academy-trained Haitian official that proved to be so effective that it has led to its foreign advisers to make inquiries .
In 2010 , the New York City Police Department ( NYPD ) sent a team of veteran officers to Haiti to assist in the rebuilding of its police force with special training in investigative techniques , strategies to improve the anti-kidnapping personnel and community outreach to build stronger relationships with the public especially among the youth . It has also helped the HNP set up a police unit in the center of Delmas , Ouest , a neighborhood of Port-au-Prince .
In 2012 and 2013 , 150 HNP officers received specialized training funded by the US government , which also contributed to the infrastructure and communications support by upgrading radio capacity and constructing new police stations from the most violent-prone neighborhoods of Cit Soleil and Grande Ravine in Port-au-Prince to the new northern industrial park at Caracol , Nord-Est .
=== Haitian penitentiary system ===
Port-au-Prince Prison is home to half of Haiti 's prisoners . The prison has a capacity of 1,200 Detention ( imprisonment ) but the penitentiary was obliged to keep 4,359 detainees , a 454 % occupancy level . This leads to severe consequences for the inmates .
One cell could hold up to 60 inmates which was originally designed for only 18 , therefore creating tight and uncomfortable living conditions . The inmates are forced to create makeshift [ from the wall and ceilings . The men are on a 22/ 23 hour lock up in the cells so the risk of diseases is very high . Unable to receive sufficient funds from the government as Haiti endures severe natural disasters which takes up their attention and resources , such as the 2010 earthquake , has caused deadly cases of malnutrition ] , combined with the tight living conditions , increases the risk of infectious diseases such as [ [ tuberculosis which has led to 21 deaths in January 2017 alone at the Port-au-Prince penitentiary .
Haitian law states that once arrested , one must go before a judge within 48 hours ; however , this is very rare . In an interview with Unreported World , the prison governor stated that around 529 detainees were never sentenced , there are 3,830 detainees who are in prolonged detained trial detention . Therefore , 80 % are not convicted .
Unless families are able to provide the necessary funds for inmates to appear before a judge there is a very slim chance the inmate would have a trial , on average , within 10 years . Brian Concannon , the director of the non-profit Institute for Justice and Democracy in Haiti , claims that without a substantial bribe to persuade judges , prosecutors and lawyers to undergo their case , there is no prospect for getting a trial for years .
Families may send food to the penitentiary ; however , most inmates depend on the meals served twice a day . However , the majority of the meals consists of ration supplies of rice , oats or cornmeal , which has led to deadly cases of malnutrition-related ailments such as Thiamine deficiency and Anemia . Prisoners too weak are crammed in the penitentiary infirmary .
In confined living spaces for 2223 hours a day , inmates are not provided with latrines and are forced to Defecation into plastic bags and leave them outside their cells . These conditions were considered inhumane by the Inter-American Court of Human Rights in 2008.
==Economy==
Haiti has a predominantly free market economy , with a GDP of $ 19.97 billion and per capita GDP of $ 1,800 ( 2017 estimates ) . The country uses the Haitian gourde as its currency . Despite its tourism industry , Haiti is one of the poorest countries in the Americas , with poverty , corruption , political instability , poor infrastructure , lack of health care and lack of education cited as the main causes . Unemployment is high and many Haitians seek to emigrate . Trade declined dramatically after the 2010 Haiti earthquake and subsequent 2010 Haiti cholera outbreak , with the country 's Gross domestic product # Cross-border comparison falling by 8 % ( from US $ 12.15 billion to US $ 11.18 billion ) . Haiti ranked 145 of 182 countries in the 2010 United Nations Human Development Index , with 57.3 % of the population being deprived in at least three of the HDI 's poverty measures .
Following the disputed 2000 election and accusations about President Aristide 's rule , US aid to the Haitian government was cut off between 2001 and 2004 . After Aristide 's departure in 2004 , aid was restored and the Brazilian army led a United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti peacekeeping operation . After almost four years of recession , the economy grew by 1.5 % in 2005 . In September 2009 , Haiti met the conditions set out by the IMF and World Bank 's Heavily Indebted Poor Countries program to qualify for cancellation of its external debt .
More than 90 percent of the government 's budget comes from an agreement with Petrocaribe , a Venezuela-led oil alliance .
===Foreign aid===
Haiti received more than US $ 4 billion in aid from 1990 to 2003 , including US $ 1.5 billion from the United States . The largest donor is the US , followed by Canada and the European Union . In January 2010 , following the earthquake , US President Barack Obama promised US $ 1.15 billion in assistance . European Union nations pledged more than 400 million ( US $ 616 million ) . Neighboring Dominican Republic has also provided extensive humanitarian aid to Haiti , including the funding and construction of a public university , human capital , free healthcare services in the border region , and logistical support after the 2010 earthquake .
According to the UN Office of the Special Envoy for Haiti , , of humanitarian funding committed or disbursed by bilateral and multilateral donors in 2010 and 2011 , only 1 % has been pledged to the Haitian government .
The United Nations states that in total US $ 13.34 billion has been earmarked for post-earthquake reconstruction through 2020 , though two years after the 2010 quake , less than half of that amount had actually been released , according to UN documents . , the US government has allocated US $ 4 billion , US $ 3 billion has already been spent , and the rest is dedicated to longer-term projects .
Former US President Bill Clinton 's foundation contributed US $ 250,000 to a recycling initiative for a sister-program of `` Ranmase Lajan '' or `` Picking Up Money '' by use of reverse vending machines .
===Trade===
According to the 2015 CIA World Factbook , Haiti 's main import partners are : Dominican Republic 35 % , US 26.8 % , Netherlands Antilles 8.7 % , China 7 % ( est . 2013 ) . Haiti 's main export partner is the US 83.5 % ( est . 2013 ) . Haiti had a trade deficit of US $ 3 billion in 2011 , or 41 % of GDP .
===Energy===
In 1925 , the city of Jacmel was the first area in the Caribbean to have electricity and was subsequently dubbed the City of Light .
Today , Haiti relies heavily on an oil alliance with Petrocaribe for much of its energy requirements . In recent years , hydroelectric , solar and wind energy have been explored as possible sustainable energy sources .
As of 2017 , among all the countries in the Americas , Haiti is producing the least amount of energy . Less than a quarter of the country has electric coverage . Most regions of Haiti that do have energy are powered by generators . These generators are often expensive and produce a lot of pollution . The areas that do get electricity experience power cuts on a daily basis , and some areas are limited to 12 hours of electricity a day . Electricity is provided by a small number of independent companies : Sogener , E-power , and Haytrac . There is no national electricity grid within the country . The most common source of energy used is wood , along with charcoal . In Haiti , about 4 million metric tons of wood products are consumed yearly . Like charcoal and wood , petroleum is also an important source of energy for Haiti . Since Haiti can not produce its own fuel , all fuel is imported . Yearly , around 691,000 tons of oil is imported into the country .
On 31 October 2018 , Evenson Calixte , the General Director of energy regulation ( ANARSE ) announced the 24 hour electricity project . To meet this objective , 236 Megawatt needs to installed in Port-au-Prince alone , with an additional 75 Megawatt needed in all other regions in the country . Presently only 27,5 % of the population has access to electricity ; moreover , the national energy agency l'lectricit d'Hati ( Ed ' H ) is only able to meet 62 % of overall electricity demand said Fritz Caillot , the Minister of Public Works , Transportation and Communication ( Travaux publics , transport et communication ( TPTC ) ) .
===Personal income===
The World Factbook reports a shortage of skilled labor , widespread unemployment and underemployment , saying `` more than two-thirds of the labor force do not have formal jobs . '' It is also often stated that three-quarters of the population lives on US $ 2 or less per day .
The CIA World Factbook also states that `` remittances are the primary source of foreign exchange , equaling one-fifth ( 20 % ) of GDP and representing more than five times the earnings from exports in 2012 '' . The World Bank estimates that over 80 % of college graduates from Haiti were living abroad in 2004.
Occasionally , families who are unable to care for children financially may send them to live with a wealthier family as a restavek , or [ servant ] . In return the family are supposed to ensure that the child is educated and provided with food and shelter , however the system is open to abuse and has proved controversial , with some likening it to child slavery .
===Real estate===
In rural areas , people often live in wooden huts with corrugated iron roofs . Outhouses are located in back of the huts . In Port-au-Prince , colorful shantytowns surround the central city and go up the mountainsides .
The middle and upper classes live in suburbs , or in the central part of the bigger cities in apartments , where there is urban planning . Many of the houses they live in are like miniature fortresses , located behind walls embedded with metal spikes , barbed wire , broken glass , and sometimes all three . The gates to these houses are barred at night , the house is locked ; guard dogs patrol the yard . These houses are often self-sufficient as well . The houses have backup generators , because the electrical grid in Haiti is unreliable . Some even have rooftop reservoirs for water , as the water supply is also unreliable .
===Agriculture===
Haiti is the world 's leading producer of Chrysopogon zizanioides , a root plant used to make luxury perfumes , essential oils and fragrances , providing for half the world 's supply . Roughly 4050 % of Haitians work in the agricultural sector . Haiti relies upon imports for half its food needs and 80 % of its rice .
Haiti exports crops such as mangoes , cocoa bean , coffee , papayas , mahogany nuts , spinach , and watercress . Agricultural products comprise 6 % of all exports . In addition , local agricultural products include maize , beans , cassava , sweet potato , peanuts , pistachios , bananas , millet , pigeon peas , sugarcane , rice , sorghum , and wood .
===Currency===
The Haitian gourde ( HTG ) is the national currency . The `` Haitian gourde '' equates to 5 gourdes ( goud ) , which is a fixed exchange rate that exists in concept only , but are commonly used as informal prices . The vast majority of the business sector and individuals in Haiti will also accept US dollars , though at the outdoor markets gourdes may be preferred . Locals may refer to the USD as `` dollar amricain '' ( dola ameriken ) or `` dollar US '' ( pronounced oo-es ) .
===Tourism===
The tourism market in Haiti is undeveloped and the government is heavily promoting this sector . Haiti has many of the features that attract tourists to other Caribbean destinations , such as white sand beaches , mountainous scenery and a year-round warm climate , however the country 's poor image overseas , at times exaggerated , has hampered the development of this sector . In 2014 , the country received 1,250,000 tourists ( mostly from cruise ships ) , and the industry generated US $ 200 million in 2014.
Several hotels were opened in 2014 , including an upscale Best Western # Differentiation , a five-star Royal Oasis hotel by Occidental Hotel and Resorts in Ption-Ville , a four-star Marriott International in the Turgeau area of Port-au-Prince and other new hotel developments in Port-au-Prince , Les Cayes , Cap-Hatien and Jacmel .
The Haitian Carnival has been one of the most popular carnivals in the Caribbean . In 2010 , the government decided to stage the event in a different city outside Port-au-Prince every year in an attempt to decentralize the country . The National Carnival usually held in one of the country 's largest cities ( i.e. , Port-au-Prince , Cap-Hatien or Les Cayes ) follows the also very popular Jacmel Carnival , which takes place a week earlier in February or March .
===Caracol Industrial Park===
On 21 October 2012 , Haitian President Michel Martelly , US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton , Bill Clinton , Richard Branson , Ben Stiller and Sean Penn inaugurated the Caracol industrial park , the largest in the Caribbean . Costing US $ 300 million , the project , which includes a 10-megawatt power plant , a water-treatment plant and worker housing , is intended to transform the northern part of the country by creating 65,000 jobs .
The park is part of a `` master plan '' for Haiti 's North and North-East departments , including the expansion of the Cap-Hatien International Airport to accommodate large international flights , the construction of an international seaport in Fort-Libert and the opening of the $ 50 million Roi Henri Christophe Campus of a new university in Limonade ( near Cap-Hatien ) on 12 January 2012.
South Korean clothing manufacturer Sae-A Trading Co. Ltd , one of the park 's main tenants , has created 5,000 permanent jobs out of the 20,000 projected and has built 8,600 houses in the surrounding area for its workers . The industrial park ultimately has the potential to create as many as 65,000 jobs once fully developed .
==Infrastructure==
===Transportation===
Haiti has two main highways that run from one end of the country to the other . The northern highway , Route Nationale No . 1 ( National Highway One ) , originates in Port-au-Prince , winding through the coastal towns of Montrouis and Gonaves , before reaching its terminus at the northern port Cap-Hatien . The southern highway , Route Nationale No . 2 , links Port-au-Prince with Les Cayes via Logne and Petit-Gove . The state of Haiti 's roads are generally poor , many being potholed and becoming impassable in rough weather .
According to the Washington Post , `` Officials from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers said Saturday [ 23 January 2010 ] that they assessed the damage from the [ 12 January ] quake in Port-au-Prince , Haiti , and found that many of the roads are n't any worse than they were before because they 've always been in poor condition . ''
The port at Port-au-Prince , Port international de Port-au-Prince , has more registered shipping than any of the other dozen ports in the country . The port 's facilities include Crane ( machine ) , large Berth ( moorings ) , and warehouses , but these facilities are not in good condition . The port is underused , possibly due to the substantially high port fees . The port of Saint-Marc is currently the preferred port of entry for consumer goods coming into Haiti . Reasons for this may include its location away from volatile and Traffic congestion Port-au-Prince , as well as its central location relative to numerous Haitian cities .
In the past , Haiti used rail transport , however the rail infrastructure was poorly maintained when in use and cost of rehabilitation is beyond the means of the Haitian economy . In 2018 the Regional Development Council of the Dominican Republic proposed a `` trans-Hispaniola '' railway between both countries .
===Airports===
Toussaint Louverture International Airport , located North/North East of Port-au-Prince proper in the commune of Tabarre , is the primary transportation hub regarding entry and exit into the country . It has Haiti 's main jetway , and along with Cap-Hatien International Airport located near the northern city of Cap-Hatien , handles the vast majority of the country 's international flights . Cities such as Jacmel , Jrmie , Les Cayes , and Port-de-Paix have smaller , less accessible airports that are serviced by regional airlines and private aircraft . Such companies include : Caribintair ( defunct ) , Sunrise Airways and Tortug ' Air ( defunct ) .
In 2013 , plans for the development of an international airport on le--Vache were introduced by the Prime Minister .
===Bus service===
Tap tap buses are colorfully painted buses or pick-up trucks that serve as share taxis . The `` tap tap '' name comes from the sound of passengers tapping on the metal bus body to indicate they want off . These vehicles for hire are often privately owned and extensively decorated . They follow fixed routes , do not leave until filled with passengers , and riders can usually disembark at any point . The decorations are a typically Haitian form of art .
In August 2013 , the first coach bus prototype was made in Haiti .
===Communications===
In Haiti , communications include the radio , television , fixed and mobile telephones , and the Internet . Haiti ranked last among North American countries in the World Economic Forum 's Network Readiness Index ( NRI ) an indicator for determining the development level of a country 's information and communication technologies . Haiti ranked number 143 out of 148 overall in the 2014 NRI ranking , down from 141 in 2013.
=== Water supply and sanitation ===
Haiti faces key challenges in the water supply and sanitation
sector :
Notably , access to public services is very low , their quality is inadequate and public institutions remain very weak despite foreign aid and the government 's declared intent to strengthen the sector 's institutions . Foreign and Haitian NGOs play an important role in the sector , especially in rural and urban slum areas .
==Demographics==
Haiti 's population is about 10,788,000 ( July 2018 est . ) with half of the population younger than age 20 . In 1950 , the first formal census gave a total population of 3.1 million . Haiti averages approximately 350 people per square kilometer ( ~900 per sq mi . ) , with its population concentrated most heavily in urban areas , coastal plains , and valleys .
Most Haitians are descendants of former black Ethnic groups of Africa slaves , including Free people of color who are multiracial mixed-race . The remainder are of White Haitian or Arab Haitians , the descendants of settlers ( colonial remnants and contemporary immigration during World War I and World War II ) . Haitians of East Asian descent or Marabou ( ethnicity ) origin number approximately more than 400.
Millions of Haitians live abroad in the Haitian Americans , Dominican Republic , Haitian Cuban , Canada ( primarily Montreal ) , Bahamas , France , French Antilles , the Turks and Caicos , Jamaica , Puerto Rico , Venezuela , Brazil , Suriname and French Guiana . There are an estimated 881,500 Haitians in the United States , 800,000 in the Dominican Republic , 300,000 in Cuba , 100,000 in Canada , 80,000 in France , and up to 80,000 in the Bahamas . There are also smaller Haitian communities in many other countries , including Chile , Switzerland , Japan and Australia .
In 2018 , the life expectancy at birth was 63.66 years .
===Population genetics===
====Autosomal DNA====
The gene pool of Haiti is about 95.5 % Sub-Saharan African , 4.3 % Ethnic groups in Europe , with the rest showing some traces of East Asian genes ; according to a 2010 autosomal genealogical DNA testing .
====Y-chromosome and mitochondrial DNA====
A 2012 genetic study on Haitian and Jamaican Human Y-chromosome DNA haplogroup Y-chromosomal ancestry has revealed that both populations `` exhibit a predominantly Y-DNA haplogroups in populations of Sub-Saharan Africa Sub-Saharan paternal component , with haplogroups Haplogroup A ( Y-DNA ) A1b-V152 , Haplogroup A ( Y-DNA ) A3-M32 , Haplogroup B ( Y-DNA ) B2-M182 , Haplogroup E ( Y-DNA ) E1a-M33 , Haplogroup E ( Y-DNA ) E1b1a-M2 , Haplogroup E ( Y-DNA ) E2b-M98 , and Haplogroup R1b ( Y-DNA ) # R1b1c ( R-V88 ) R1b2-V88 '' comprising ( 77.2 % ) of the Haitian and ( 66.7 % ) of Jamaican paternal gene pools . Y-chromosomes indicative of Y-DNA haplogroups in populations of Europe `` ( i.e. , haplogroups Haplogroup G-M201 G2a * -P15 , Haplogroup I-M170 I-M258 , Haplogroup R1b ( Y-DNA ) # R1b1a2 ( R-M269 ) R1b1b-M269 , and Haplogroup T-M184 T-M184 ) were detected at commensurate levels in Haiti ( 20.3 % ) and Jamaica ( 18.9 % ) '' .
While Y-haplogroups indicative of Chinese O-M175 ( 3.8 % ) and Indian H-M69 ( 0.6 % ) and L-M20 ( 0.6 % ) ancestry were found at significant levels in Jamaica , Arab Haitian Y-haplogroups were found in Haiti .
====Duffy antigens====
According to a 2008 study examining the frequency of the Duffy antigen system receptor for Chemokines ( DARC ( gene ) ) Single-nucleotide polymorphism ( SNPs ) , ( 75 % ) of Haitian women sampled exhibited the CC genotype ( absent among women of European ancestry ) at levels comparable to US African-Americans ( 73 % ) , but more than Jamaican females ( 63 % ) .
===Racial discrimination===
Under colonial rule , Mulatto were generally privileged above the black majority , though they possessed fewer rights than the white population . Following the country 's independence , they became the nation 's social elite . Numerous leaders throughout Haiti 's history have been mulattoes . During this time , the slaves and the affranchis were given limited opportunities toward education , income , and occupations , but even after gaining independence , the social structure remains a legacy today as the disparity between the upper and lower classes have not been reformed significantly since the colonial days . Comprising 5 % of the nation 's population , mulattoes have retained their preeminence , evident in the political , economic , social and cultural hierarchy in Haiti . As a result , the elite class today consists of a small group of influential people who are generally light in color and continue to establish themselves in high , prestigious positions .
===Religion===
The 2017 CIA Factbook reported that around 54.7 % of Haitians profess to being Roman Catholicism in Haiti while Protestantism in Haiti made up about 28.5 % of the population ( Baptist 15.4 % , Pentecostal 7.9 % , Seventh-day Adventist 3 % , Methodist 1.5 % , other 0.7 % ) . Other sources put the Protestant population higher than this , suggesting that it might have formed one-third of the population in 2001 . Like other countries in Latin America , Haiti has witnessed a general Protestant expansion , which is largely Evangelical Protestant and Pentecostal in nature . Haitian Cardinal ( Catholicism ) Chibly Langlois is president of the National Bishops Conference of the Catholic Church .
Haitian vodou , a religion with West African roots similar to those of Cuba and Brazil , originated during colonial times in which slaves were obliged to disguise their loa , or spirits , as Catholic Church saints , an element of a process called syncretism and is still practiced by some Haitians today . Due to the religious syncretism between Catholicism and Vodou , it is difficult to estimate the number of Vodouists in Haiti . The religion has historically been persecuted and misrepresented in popular media , however in 2003 the Government recognized the faith as an official religion of the nation .
Minority religions in Haiti include Islam in Haiti , Bah '  Faith in Haiti Bah '  Faith , History of the Jews in Haiti , and Buddhism .
===Languages===
The two official languages of Haiti are French language and Haitian Creole . French is the principal written and administratively authorized language ( as well as the main language of the press ) and is spoken by 42 % of Haitians . It is spoken by all educated Haitians , is the medium of instruction in most schools , and is used in the business sector . It is also used in ceremonial events such as weddings , graduations and church Masses . Haiti is one of two independent nations in the Americas ( along with Canada ) to designate French as an official language ; the other French-speaking areas are all French overseas departments and territories Departments of France , or Overseas collectivity , of France , such as French Guiana .
Haitian Creole , which has recently undergone a standardization , is spoken by virtually the entire population of Haiti . Haitian Creole is one of the French-based creole languages . Its vocabulary is 90 % derived from French , but its grammar resembles that of some West African languages . It also has influences from Taino , Spanish , and Portuguese . Haitian Creole is related to the other French-based creole languages , but most closely to the Antillean Creole and Louisiana Creole French variants .
===Emigration===
There is a large Haitian diaspora community , predominantly based in the US and Canada , France , and the wealthier Caribbean islands .
Emigrants from Haiti have constituted a segment of American and Canadian society since before Haitian Revolution in 1804 . Many influential early American settlers and black freemen , including Jean Baptiste Point du Sable and W. E. B . Du Bois , were of Haitian origin .
Jean Baptiste Point du Sable , an immigrant from Saint-Domingue ( now the Republic of Haiti ) , founded the first nonindigenous settlement in what is now Chicago , Illinois , the third largest city in the United States . The state of Illinois and city of Chicago declared du Sable the founder of Chicago on 26 October 1968.
===Largest cities===
==Culture==
Haiti has a rich and unique cultural identity , consisting of a blend of traditional French and African customs , mixed with sizeable contributions from the Spanish and indigenous Tano cultures . Haiti 's culture is greatly reflected in its paintings , music , and literature . Galleries and museums in the United States and France have exhibited the works of the better-known artists to have come out of Haiti .
===Art===
Haitian art is Haitian art , particularly through its paintings and sculptures . Brilliant colors , Nave art perspectives , and sly humor characterize Haitian art . Frequent subjects in Haitian art include big , delectable foods , lush landscapes , market activities , jungle animals , rituals , dances , and gods . As a result of a deep history and strong African ties , symbols take on great meaning within Haitian society . For example , a rooster often represents Aristide and the red and blue colors of the Haitian flag often represent his Lavalas party . Many artists cluster in 'schools ' of painting , such as the Cap-Hatien school , which features depictions of daily life in the city , the Jacmel School , which reflects the steep mountains and bays of that coastal town , or the Saint-Soleil School , which is characterised by abstracted human forms and is heavily influenced by Vodou symbolism .
In the 1920s the indigniste movement gained international acclaim , with its expressionist paintings inspired by Haiti 's culture and African roots . Notable painters of this movement include Hector Hyppolite , Philom Oban and Prfte Duffaut . Some notable artists of more recent times include Edouard Duval-Carri , Frantz Zphirin , Leroy Exil , Prosper Pierre Louis and Louisiane Saint Fleurant . Sculpture is also practised in Haiti ; noted artists in this form include George Liautaud and Serge Jolimeau .
===Music and dance===
Haitian music combines a wide range of influences drawn from the many people who have settled here . It reflects French , African and Spanish elements and others who have inhabited the island of Hispaniola , and minor native Taino influences . Styles of music unique to the nation of Haiti include music derived from Haitian Vodou ceremonial traditions , Rara parading music , Twoubadou ballads , mini-jazz rock bands , Rasin movement , Haitian hip hop kreyl , mringue , and compas . Youth attend parties at nightclubs called Nightlife , ( pronounced `` deece-ko '' ) , and attend Bal . This term is the French word for ball , as in a formal dance .
Compas ( konpa ) ( also known as compas direct in French language , or konpa dirk in Haitian Creole language ) is a complex , ever-changing music that arose from African rhythms and European ballroom dancing , mixed with Haiti 's bourgeois culture . It is a refined music , with mringue as its basic rhythm . Haiti had no recorded music until 1937 when Jazz Guignard was recorded non-commercially .
===Literature===
Haiti has always been a literary nation that has produced poetry , novels , and plays of international recognition . The Saint Domingue established the French language as the venue of culture and prestige , and since then it has dominated the literary circles and the literary production . However , since the 18th century there has been a sustained effort to write in Haitian Creole . The recognition of Creole as an official language has led to an expansion of novels , poems , and plays in Creole . In 1975 , Franketienne was the first to break with the French tradition in fiction with the publication of Dezafi , the first novel written entirely in Haitian Creole ; the work offers a poetic picture of Haitian life . Other well known Haitian authors include Jean Price-Mars , Jacques Roumain , Marie Vieux-Chauvet , Pierre Clitandre , Ren Depestre , Edwidge Danticat , Lyonel Trouillot and Dany Laferrire .
===Cinema===
Haiti has a small though growing cinema industry . Well-known directors working primarily in documentary film-making include Raoul Peck and Arnold Antonin . Directors producing fictional films include Patricia Benoit ( director ) , Wilkenson Bruna and Richard Senecal .
===Cuisine===
Haiti is famous for its creole cuisine ( which related to Cajun cuisine ) , and its soup joumou .
===Architecture===
Monuments include the Sans-Souci Palace and the Citadelle Laferrire , inscribed as a World Heritage site in 1982 . Situated in the Northern Massif du Nord , in one of Haiti 's National Parks , the structures date from the early 19th century . The buildings were among the first built after Haiti 's independence from France .
The Citadelle Laferrire , is the largest fortress in the Americas , is located in northern Haiti . It was built between 1805 and 1820 and is today referred to by some Haitians as the eighth wonder of the world .
The Institut de Sauvegarde du Patrimoine National has preserved 33 historical monuments and the historic center of Cap-Hatien .
Jacmel , a colonial city that was tentatively accepted as a World Heritage site , was extensively damaged by the 2010 Haiti earthquake .
===Museums===
The anchor of Christopher Columbus 's largest ship , the Santa Mara ( ship ) now rests in the Muse du Panthon National Hatien ( MUPANAH ) , in Port-au-Prince , Haiti .
===Folklore and mythology===
Haiti is known for its folklore traditions . Much of this is rooted in Haitian Vodou tradition . Belief in zombies is also common . Other folkloric creatures include the Soucouyant .
===National holidays and festivals===
The most festive time of the year in Haiti is during Carnival ( referred to as Kanaval in Haitian Creole or Mardi Gras ) in February . There is music , parade floats , and dancing and singing in the streets . Carnival week is traditionally a time of all-night parties .
Rara is a festival celebrated before Easter . The festival has generated a style of Carnival music .
===Sports===
Association football ( soccer ) is the most popular sport in Haiti with hundreds of small football clubs competing at the local level . Basketball is growing in popularity . Stade Sylvio Cator is the multi-purpose stadium in Port-au-Prince , where it is currently used mostly for association football matches that fits a capacity of 10,000 people . In 1974 FIFA World Cup , the Haiti national football team were only the second Caribbean team to make the FIFA World Cup ( after Cuba 's entry in 1938 ) . They lost in the opening qualifying stages against three of the pre-tournament favorites ; Italy national football team , Poland national football team , and Argentina national football team . The national team won the 2007 Caribbean Nations Cup .
Haiti has participated in the Haiti at the Olympics since the year 1900 and won a number of medals . Haitian footballer Joe Gaetjens played for the United States men 's national soccer team in the 1950 FIFA World Cup , scoring the winning goal in the 10 upset of England national football team .
==Notable natives and residents==
* Charles Hector , comte d'Estaing Comte d'Estaing in command of more than 500 volunteers from Saint-Domingue ; fought alongside American colonial troops against the British in the Siege of Savannah , one of the most significant foreign contributions to the American Revolutionary War in 1779
* Raquel Pelissier one of Haiti 's most remarkable beauty queen ; Miss Universe 2017 first runner-up and Reina Hispanoamericana 2016 third runner-up
* Franktienne arguably Haiti 's greatest author ; candidate for the Nobel Prize in Literature in 2009
* Garcelle Beauvais television actress ( NYPD Blue , The Jamie Foxx Show )
* Jean Baptiste Point du Sable might have been born in St Marc , Saint-Domingue ; in 1745 established a fur trading post at present-day Chicago , Illinois ; considered one of the city 's founders
* Jean Lafitte pirate who operated around New Orleans and Galveston , Texas on the Gulf Coast of the United States ; born in Port-au-Prince around 1782
* John James Audubon ornithologist and painter ; born in 1785 in Les Cayes , Saint-Domingue ; his parents returned to France , where he was educated ; emigrated to the United States as a young man and made a career as he painted , catalogued and described the birds of North America
* Jrgen Leth Danish poet and filmmaker
* Sean Penn  American Oscar Award-winning actor , who currently serves as Ambassador-at-large for Haiti ; the first non-Haitian citizen to hold such a position
* Michalle Jean current Organisation internationale de la Francophonie Secretary-General of La Francophonie and 27th Governor General of Canada ; born in Port-au-Prince in 1957 and lived in Haiti until 1968
* Wyclef Jean Grammy Award-winning hip-hop recording artist
==Education==
The educational system of Haiti is based on the Education in France . Higher education , under the responsibility of the Ministry of Education , is provided by universities and other public and private institutions .
More than 80 % of primary schools are privately managed by nongovernmental organizations , churches , communities , and for-profit operators , with minimal government oversight . According to the 2013 Millennium Development Goals ( MDG ) Report , Haiti has steadily boosted net enrollment rate in primary education from 47 % in 1993 to 88 % in 2011 , achieving equal participation of boys and girls in education . Charity organizations , including Food for the Poor and Haitian Health Foundation , are building schools for children and providing necessary school supplies .
According to CIA 2015 World Factbook , Haiti 's literacy rate is now 60.7 % ( est . 2015 ) .
The January 2010 earthquake , was a major setback for education reform in Haiti as it diverted limited resources to survival .
Many reformers have advocated the creation of a free , public and universal education system for all primary school-age students in Haiti . The Inter-American Development Bank estimates that the government will need at least US $ 3 billion to create an adequately funded system .
Upon successful graduation of secondary school , students may continue into [ education ] . The higher education schools in Haiti include the University of Haiti . There are also List of medical schools in the Caribbean and Legal education offered at both the University of Haiti and abroad . Presently , Brown University is cooperating with L'Hpital Saint-Damien in Haiti to coordinate a pediatrics curriculum .
==Health==
In the past , children 's vaccination rates have been low , 60 % of the children in Haiti under the age of 10 were Vaccine , compared to rates of childhood vaccination in other countries in the 9395 % range . Recently there have been mass vaccination campaigns claiming to vaccinate as many as 91 % of a target population against specific diseases ( measles and rubella in this case ) . Most people have no transportation or access to List of hospitals in Haiti .
The World Health Organization cites diarrheal diseases , HIV/AIDS , meningitis , and respiratory infections as common causes of death in Haiti . Ninety percent of Haiti 's children suffer from waterborne diseases and intestinal parasites . HIV infection is found in 1.71 % of Haiti 's population ( est . 2015 ) . The incidence of tuberculosis ( TB ) in Haiti is more than ten times as high as in the rest of Latin America . Approximately 30,000 Haitians fall ill with malaria each year .
Most people living in Haiti are at high risk for major infectious diseases . Food or Waterborne diseases water-borne diseases include bacterial and protozoal diarrhea , typhoid fever and [ A and E ; common Vector ( epidemiology ) vector ] -borne diseases are [ [ dengue fever and malaria ; water-contact diseases include leptospirosis . Roughly 75 % of Haitian households lack running water . Unsafe water , along with inadequate housing and unsanitary living conditions , contributes to the high incidence of infectious diseases . There is a chronic shortage of health care personnel and hospitals lack resources , a situation that became readily apparent after the January 2010 earthquake . The infant mortality rate in Haiti in 2013 was 55 deaths per 1,000 live births , compared to a rate of 6 per 1,000 in other countries .
After the 2010 earthquake , Partners In Health founded the Hpital Universitaire de Mirebalais , the largest Solar power solar-powered hospital in the world .
==See also==
* Index of Haiti-related articles
* Outline of Haiti
==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
* Prichard , Hesketh . Where Black Rules White : A Journey Across and About Hayti . These are exact reproductions of a book published before 1923 : ( Nabu Press , , 5 March 2010 ) ; ( Wermod and Wermod Publishing Group , , 15 October 2012 ) .
* Arthur , Charles . Haiti in Focus : A Guide to the People , Politics , and Culture . Interlink Publishing Group ( 2002 ) . .
* Dayan , Colin . Haiti , History , and the Gods . University of California Press ( 1998 ) .
* Ferrer , Ada . Freedom 's Mirror : Cuba and Haiti in the Age of Revolution . New York : Cambridge University Press , 2014.
* Girard , Philippe . Haiti : The Tumultuous History ( New York : Palgrave , September 2010 ) .
* Hadden , Robert Lee and Steven G. Minson . 2010 . The Geology of Haiti : An Annotated Bibliography of Haiti 's Geology , Geography and Earth Science . US Army Corps of Engineers , Army Geospatial Center . July 2010.
* Heinl , Robert Debs & Nancy Gordon Heinl . Written in Blood : The Story of the Haitian People 14921995 . University Press of America ( 2005 ) . .
* Kovats-Bernat , J. Christopher . Sleeping Rough in Port-au-Prince : An Ethnography of Street Children and Violence in Haiti . University Press of Florida ( 2008 ) . .
* Robinson , Randall . An Unbroken Agony : Haiti , From Revolution to the Kidnapping of a President . Basic Civitas ( 2007 ) . .
* Wilentz , Amy . The Rainy Season : Haiti Since Duvalier . Simon & Schuster ( 1990 ) . .
* Marquis , John . Papa Doc : Portrait of a Haitian Tyrant ( LMH Publishing , 2007 )
==External links==
; Government
*
* Prime Minister of Haiti
* Haitian Parliament
* Secretary General of the Council of Ministers
* ( in French ) Ministry of Tourism
; General information
* Visit Haiti Official Tourism Website
*
* Haiti at Encyclopdia Britannica .
* Haiti . The World Factbook . Central Intelligence Agency .
* Haiti at UCB Libraries GovPubs .
* A Country Study : Haiti from the US Library of Congress ( December 1989 ) .
* Haiti profile from the BBC News .
* Country Profile at New Internationalist .
* Web Site about Safe and Sustainable Water Solutions for Haiti
Category : Haiti
Category : Countries in the Caribbean
Category : Former Spanish colonies
Category : Former French colonies
Category : French Caribbean
Category : Island countries
Category : French-speaking countries and territories
Category : Greater Antilles
Category : Least developed countries
Category : Member states of the Caribbean Community
Category : Member states of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie
Category : Member states of the United Nations
Category : Republics
Category : States and territories established in 1804
Category:1492 establishments in the Spanish West Indies
Category : Small Island Developing States
Category:1804 establishments in North America
Category:1620s establishments in New France
Category:1804 disestablishments in the French colonial empire
Category:17th-century disestablishments in the Spanish West Indies
Category : Countries in North America <article_end> <article_start>  
Hungary ( Magyarorszg ) is a country in Central Europe . Spanning in the Pannonian Basin , it borders Slovakia to the north , Ukraine to the northeast , Romania to the east and southeast , Serbia to the south , Croatia and Slovenia to the southwest , and Austria to the west . With about 10 ; million inhabitants , Hungary is a Member state of the European Union medium-sized member state of the European Union . The Languages of Hungary is Hungarian language , which is the most widely spoken Uralic languages in the world , and among the few non-Indo-European languages to be widely spoken in Europe . Hungary 's capital and List of cities and towns of Hungary is Budapest ; other major urban areas include Debrecen , Szeged , Miskolc , Pcs , and Gyr .
The territory of present Hungary was for centuries inhabited by a succession of peoples , including Celts , Ancient Rome , Germanic people , Huns , West Slavs and the Avars ( Carpathians ) . The foundations of the Hungarian state were established in the late ninth century AD by the Hungarians grand prince rpd following the Hungarian conquest of the Carpathian Basin . His great-grandson Stephen I of Hungary ascended the throne in 1000 , converting his realm to a Kingdom of Hungary . By the 12th century , Hungary became a regional power , reaching its Kingdom of Hungary ( 13011526 ) . Following the Battle of Mohcs in 1526 , Hungary was partially Ottoman Hungary ( 15411699 ) . The country came under Habsburg Monarchy entirely at the turn of the 18th century , and later Compromise of 1867 Austrian Empire to form the AustroHungarian Empire , a major European power .
The Austro-Hungarian Empire collapsed after World War I , and the subsequent Treaty of Trianon established Hungary 's current borders , resulting in the loss of 71 % of its territory , 58 % of its population , and Hungarian diaspora 32 % of ethnic Hungarians . Following the tumultuous Hungary between the World Wars , Hungary joined the Axis Powers in World War II , suffering significant damage and casualties . Postwar Hungary became a satellite state of the Soviet Union , which contributed to the establishment of a Hungarian People 's Republic ( 19491989 ) . Following the failed Hungarian Revolution of 1956 against the Soviet-backed government , Hungary became a Goulash Communism , though still repressive , member of the Eastern Bloc . The seminal End of Communism in Hungary ( 1989 ) # Attitudes toward the Warsaw Pact opening of the previously-restricted border with Austria in 1989 accelerated the collapse of the Eastern Bloc , and Collapse of the Soviet government . On 23 October 1989 , Hungary became a democracy parliamentary republic .
Hungary is considered a developed country with a World Bank high-income economy high-income economy and a very high Human Development Index . Hungarians enjoy Healthcare in Hungary and tuition-free List of universities in Hungary . Hungary 's Culture of Hungary history includes significant contributions to its Hungarian art , Music of Hungary , Hungarian literature , Hungary at the Olympics , Science and technology in Hungary.Refers to the country as `` widely considered '' to be a `` home of music '' . It is the World Tourism rankings thirteenth-most popular Tourism in Hungary in Europe , drawing 15.8 ; million international tourists in 2017 , owing to attractions such as the largest Hot spring cave system in the world , Lake Hvz , the Lake Balaton and the Hortobgy National Park .
Hungary 's cultural , historical , and academic prominence classify it as a middle power in global affairs . Hungary joined the European Union in 2004 and has been part of the Schengen Area since 2007 . It is a member of numerous international organisations , including the United Nations , NATO , WTO , World Bank , International Investment Bank , the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank , the Council of Europe , and the Visegrd Group .
== Etymology ==
The `` H '' in the name of Hungary ( and Latin Hungaria ) is most likely due to founded historical associations with the Huns , who had settled Hungary prior to the Pannonian Avars . The rest of the word comes from the Latinized form of medieval Greek Oungroi (  ) . The Greek name was borrowed from Old Church Slavonic grin , in turn borrowed from Oghur languages Oghur-Turkic Onogurs ( 'ten [ tribes of the ] Ogurs ' ) . Onogur was the collective name for the tribes who later joined the Bulgars tribal confederacy that ruled the eastern parts of Hungary after the Avars .
The Hungarian endonym is Magyarorszg , composed of magyar ( 'Hungarian ' ) and orszg ( 'country ' ) . The name `` Magyar '' , which refers to the people of the country , more accurately reflects the name of the country in some other languages such as Turkish language , Persian language and other languages as Magyaristan or Land of Magyars or similar . The word magyar is taken from the name of one of the seven major semi-nomadic Hungarian tribes , magyeri . The first element magy is likely from Proto-Ugric * m- 'man , person ' , also found in the name of the Mansi people ( m , mai , m ) . The second element eri , 'man , men , lineage ' , survives in Hungarian frj 'husband ' , and is cognate with Mari language erge 'son ' , Finnish language archaic yrk 'young man ' .
== History ==
=== Before 895 ===
The Roman Empire conquered the territory west of the Danube River between 35 and 9 ; BC . From 9 ; BC to the end of the 4th century AD , Pannonia , the western part of the Carpathian Basin , was part of the Roman Empire . After the Western Roman Empire collapsed in the 5th century AD under the stress of the migration of Germanic peoples and Carpi ( people ) pressure , the Migration Period continued to bring many invaders into Central Europe , beginning with the Huns ( c. 370469 ) . The most powerful ruler of the Hunnic Empire was Attila the Hun ( 434453 ) who later became a central figure in Hungarian mythology . After the disintegration of the Hunnic Empire , the Gepids , an Eastern Germanic tribe , who had been vassalized by the Huns , established their own kingdom in the Carpathian Basin . Other groups which reached the Carpathian Basin in the Migration Period were the Goths , Vandals , Lombards , and Early Slavs . In the 560s , the Pannonian Avars founded the Avar Khaganate , a state that maintained supremacy in the region for more than two centuries . The Franks under Charlemagne defeated the Avars in a series of campaigns during the 790s . By the mid-9th century , the Pannonian Slavs # Principality , also known as Lower Pannonia , was established west of the Danube river as part of the Frankish March of Pannonia . The First Bulgarian Empire conquered the lands east of the Danube river and took over rule of the local Slavic tribes and remnants of the Avars .
===Medieval Hungary ( 8951526 ) ===
The freshly unified Magyar tribes led by rpd ( by tradition a descendant of Attila ) , settled in the Carpathian Basin starting in 895 . According to the Finno-Ugric languages Finno-Ugrian theory , they originated from an ancient Uralic languages-speaking population that formerly inhabited the forested area between the Volga River and the Ural Mountains .
As a federation of united tribes , Hungarian Conquest of the Carpathian Basin , some 50 years after the division of the Carolingian Empire at the Treaty of Verdun in 843 , before the unification of the Kingdom of England Anglo-Saxon kingdoms . Initially , the rising Principality of Hungary ( `` Western Tourkia '' in medieval Greek sources ) was a state created by a semi-nomadic people . It accomplished an enormous transformation into a Christian realm during the 10th century .
This state was well-functioning and the nation 's military power allowed the Hungarians to conduct successful Hungarian invasions of Europe , from Constantinople to as far as today 's Spain . The Hungarians defeated no fewer than Hungarian invasions of Europe between 907 and 910 . A later defeat at the Battle of Lechfeld in 955 signalled a provisory end to most campaigns on foreign territories , at least towards the West .
====Age of rpdian kings====
The year 972 marked the date when the ruling prince ( fejedelem ) Gza , Grand Prince of the Hungarians of the rpd dynasty officially started to integrate Hungary into the Christian Western Europe . His first-born son , Stephen I of Hungary , became the first King of Hungary after defeating his paganism uncle Koppny , who also claimed the throne . Under Stephen , Hungary was recognised as a Catholic Apostolic Kingdom . Applying to Pope Sylvester II , Stephen received the insignia of royalty ( including probably a part of the Holy Crown of Hungary , currently kept in the Hungarian Parliament Building ) from the papacy .
By 1006 , Stephen consolidated his power , and started sweeping reforms to convert Hungary into a Western Feudalism . The country switched to using the Latin language , and until as late as 1844 , Latin remained the official language of Hungary . Around this time , Hungary began to become a powerful kingdom . Ladislaus I of Hungary extended Hungary 's frontier in Transylvania and invaded Kingdom of Croatia ( medieval ) in 1091 . The Croatian campaign culminated in the Battle of Gvozd Mountain in 1097 and a Croatia in personal union with Hungary in 1102 , ruled by Coloman of Hungary i.e . Knyves Klmn .
The most powerful and wealthiest king of the rpd dynasty was Bla III of Hungary , who disposed of the equivalent of 23 tonnes of pure silver a year . This exceeded the income of the French king ( estimated at 17 tonnes ) and was double the receipts of the English Crown .
Andrew II of Hungary issued the Diploma Andreanum which secured the special privileges of the Transylvanian Saxons and is considered the first Autonomy law in the world . He led the Fifth Crusade to the Holy Land in 1217 , setting up the largest royal army in the history of Crusades . His Golden Bull of 1222 was the first constitution in Continental Europe . The lesser nobles also began to present Andrew with grievances , a practice that evolved into the institution of the parliament ( parlamentum publicum ) .
In 12411242 , the kingdom received a major blow with the Mongolian invasion of Hungary Mongol ( Tatar ) invasion . Up to half of Hungary 's then population of 2,000,000 were victims of the invasion . King Bla IV let Cumans and Jassic people into the country , who were fleeing the Mongols . Over the centuries , they were fully assimilated into the Hungarian population .
As a consequence , after the Mongols retreated , King Bla ordered the construction of hundreds of stone castles and fortifications , to defend against a possible second Mongol invasion . The Second Mongol invasion of Hungary in 1285 , but the newly built stone-castle systems and new tactics ( using a higher proportion of heavily armed knights ) stopped them . The invading Mongol force was defeated near Pest by the royal army of Ladislaus IV of Hungary . As with later invasions , it was repelled handily , the Mongols losing much of their invading force .
==== Age of elected kings ====
The Kingdom of Hungary reached one of its greatest extents during the rpdian kings , yet royal power was weakened at the end of their rule in 1301 . After a destructive period of interregnum ( 13011308 ) , the first Capetian House of Anjou king , Charles I of Hungary  a bilineal descendant of the rpd dynasty  successfully restored royal power , and defeated oligarch rivals , the so-called `` little kings '' . The second Angevin Hungarian king , Louis I of Hungary ( 13421382 ) , led many successful military campaigns from Lithuania to Southern Italy ( Kingdom of Naples ) , and was also King of Poland from 1370 . After King Louis died without a male heir , the country was stabilized only when Sigismund , Holy Roman Emperor ( 13871437 ) succeeded to the throne , who in 1433 also became Holy Roman Emperor . Sigismund was also ( in several ways ) a bilineal descendant of the rpd dynasty .
The first Hungarian Bible translation was completed in 1439 . For half a year in 1437 , there was an antifeudal and anticlerical peasant revolt in Transylvania , the Budai Nagy Antal Revolt , which was strongly influenced by Hussite ideas .
From a small noble family in Transylvania , John Hunyadi grew to become one of the country 's most powerful lords , thanks to his outstanding capabilities as a mercenary commander . He was elected governor then regent . He was a successful crusader against the Ottoman Turks , one of his greatest victories being the Siege of Belgrade ( 1456 ) in 1456.
The last strong king of medieval Hungary was the Renaissance king Matthias Corvinus ( 14581490 ) , son of John Hunyadi . His election was the first time that a member of the nobility mounted to the Hungarian royal throne without dynastic background . He was a successful military leader and an enlightened patron of the arts and learning . His library , the Bibliotheca Corviniana , was Europe 's greatest collection of historical chronicles , philosophic and scientific works in the 15th century , and second only in size to the Vatican Library . Items from the Bibliotheca Corviniana were inscribed on UNESCO 's Memory of the World Register in 2005.
The serfs and common people considered him a just ruler because he protected them from excessive demands from and other abuses by the magnates . Under his rule , in 1479 , the Hungarian army destroyed the Ottoman and Wallachian troops at the Battle of Breadfield . Abroad he defeated the Polish and German imperial armies of Frederick at Breslau ( Wrocaw ) . Matthias ' mercenary standing army , the Black Army of Hungary , was an unusually large army for its time , and it conquered parts of Austria , Vienna ( 1485 ) and parts of Bohemia .
==== Decline of Hungary ( 14901526 ) ====
King Matthias died without lawful sons , and the Hungarian magnates procured the accession of the Pole Vladislaus II of Bohemia and Hungary ( 14901516 ) , supposedly because of his weak influence on Hungarian aristocracy . Hungary 's international role declined , its political stability shaken , and social progress was deadlocked . In 1514 , the weakened old King Vladislaus II faced a major peasant rebellion led by Gyrgy Dzsa , which was ruthlessly crushed by the Nobility in the Kingdom of Hungary , led by John Zpolya .
The resulting degradation of order paved the way for Ottoman pre-eminence . In 1521 , the strongest Hungarian fortress in the South , Nndorfehrvr ( today 's Belgrade , Serbia ) , Siege of Belgrade ( 1521 ) . The early appearance of Protestantism further worsened internal relations in the country .
=== Ottoman wars ( 15261699 ) ===
After some Ottoman wars in Europe with the Hungarians and other states , the Ottomans gained a decisive victory over the Hungarian army at the Battle of Mohcs in 1526 , where Louis II of Hungary died while fleeing . Amid political chaos , the divided Nobility in the Kingdom of Hungary elected two kings simultaneously , John Zpolya and Ferdinand I , Holy Roman Emperor of the Habsburg dynasty . With the conquest of Buda by the Turks in 1541 , Hungary was divided into three parts and remained so until the end of the 17th century . The north-western part , termed as Royal Hungary , was annexed by the Habsburgs who ruled as Kings of Hungary . The eastern part of the kingdom became independent as the Principality of Transylvania ( 15711711 ) , under Ottoman ( and later Habsburg ) suzerainty . The remaining central area , including the capital Buda , was known as the Ottoman Hungary .
The vast majority of the seventeen and nineteen thousand Ottoman soldiers in service in the Ottoman fortresses in the territory of Hungary were Orthodox and Muslim Balkan Slavs rather than ethnic Turkish people . Orthodox Southern Slavs were also acting as akinjis and other light troops intended for pillaging in the territory of present-day Hungary . In 1686 , the Holy League ( 1684 ) Holy League 's army , containing over 74,000 men from various nations , Battle of Buda ( 1686 ) from the Turks . After some more crushing Austro-Turkish War of 171618 in the next few years , the entire Kingdom of Hungary was removed from Ottoman rule by 1718 . The last raid into Hungary by the Ottoman vassals Crimean Khanate from Crimea took place in 1717 . The constrained Habsburg Counter-Reformation efforts in the 17th century reconverted the majority of the kingdom to Catholicism . The ethnic composition of Hungary was fundamentally changed as a consequence of the prolonged warfare with the Turks . A large part of the country became devastated , population growth was stunted , and many smaller settlements perished . The Austrian-Habsburg government settled large groups of Serbs and other Slavs in the depopulated south , and settled Germans of Hungary ( called Danube Swabians ) in various areas , but Hungarians were not allowed to settle or re-settle in the south of the Pannonian Plain .
=== From the 18th century to World War I ( 16991918 ) ===
Between 1703 and 1711 , there was a large-scale uprising led by Francis II Rkczi , who after the dethronement of the Habsburgs in 1707 at the Diet of nod , took power provisionally as the Ruling Prince of Hungary for the wartime period , but refused the Hungarian Crown and the title `` King '' . The uprisings lasted for years . The Hungarian Kuruc army , although taking over most of the country , lost the main Battle of Trencsn ( 1708 ) . Three years later , because of the growing desertion , defeatism and low morale , the Kuruc forces finally surrendered .
During the Napoleonic Wars and afterwards , the Hungarian Diet had not convened for decades . In the 1820s , the Emperor was forced to convene the Diet , which marked the beginning of a Reform Period ( 18251848 , reformkor ) . Count Istvn Szchenyi , one of the most prominent statesmen of the country , recognised the urgent need of modernisation and his message got through . The Hungarian Parliament was reconvened in 1825 to handle financial needs . A liberal party emerged and focused on providing for the peasantry . Lajos Kossuth  a famous journalist at that time  emerged as leader of the lower gentry in the Parliament . A remarkable upswing started as the nation concentrated its forces on modernisation even though the Habsburg monarchs obstructed all important liberal laws relating to civil and political rights and economic reforms . Many reformers ( Lajos Kossuth , Mihly Tncsics ) were imprisoned by the authorities .
On 15 March 1848 , mass demonstrations in Pest and Buda enabled Hungarian reformists to push through a list of 12 points of the Hungarian Revolutionaries of 1848 . Under governor and president Lajos Kossuth and the first Prime Minister , Lajos Batthyny , the House of Habsburg was dethroned .
The Habsburg Ruler and his advisors skilfully manipulated the Croatian , Serbian and Romanian peasantry , led by priests and officers firmly loyal to the Habsburgs , and induced them to rebel against the Hungarian government , though the Hungarians were supported by the vast majority of the Slovak , German and Rusyns nationalities and by all the Jews of the kingdom , as well as by a large number of Polish , Austrian and Italian volunteers . In July 1849 the Hungarian Parliament proclaimed and enacted the first laws of ethnic and minority rights in the world . Many members of the nationalities gained the coveted highest positions within the Hungarian Army , like General Jnos Damjanich , an ethnic Serb who became a Hungarian national hero through his command of the 3rd Hungarian Army Corps or Jzef Bem , who was Polish and also became a national hero in Hungary . The Hungarian forces ( Royal Hungarian Landwehr ) defeated Austrian armies . To counter the successes of the Hungarian revolutionary army , Habsburg Emperor Franz Joseph I asked for help from the `` Gendarme of Europe '' , Tsar Nicholas I of Russia , whose Russian armies invaded Hungary . This made Artr Grgey surrender in August 1849 . The leader of the Austrian army , Julius Jacob von Haynau , became governor of Hungary for a few months , and ordered the execution of the 13 Martyrs of Arad , leaders of the Hungarian army , and Prime Minister Batthyny in October 1849 . Lajos Kossuth escaped into exile . Following the war of 18481849 , the whole country was in `` passive resistance '' .
Because of external and internal problems , reforms seemed inevitable and major military defeats of Austria forced the Habsburgs to negotiate the Austro-Hungarian Compromise of 1867 , by which the dual Monarchy of AustriaHungary was formed . This Empire had the second largest area in Europe ( after the Russian Empire ) , and it was the third most populous ( after Russia and the German Empire ) . The two realms were governed separately by two parliaments from two capital cities , with a common monarch and common external and military policies . Economically , the empire was a customs union . The old Hungarian Constitution was restored , and Franz Joseph I was crowned as King of Hungary . The era witnessed impressive economic development . The formerly backward Hungarian economy became relatively modern and industrialised by the turn of the 20th century , although agriculture remained dominant until 1890 . In 1873 , the old capital Buda and buda were officially united with Pest , Hungary , thus creating the new metropolis of Budapest . Many of the state institutions and the modern administrative system of Hungary were established during this period .
After the Assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand in Sarajevo , the Hungarian prime minister Istvn Tisza and his cabinet tried to avoid the outbreak and escalating of a war in Europe , but their diplomatic efforts were unsuccessful . AustriaHungary drafted 9 ; million ( fighting forces : 7.8 ; million ) soldiers in World War I ( over 4 ; million from the Kingdom of Hungary ) on the side of Germany , Bulgaria and Turkey . The troops raised in the Kingdom of Hungary spent little time defending the actual territory of Hungary , with the exceptions of the Brusilov Offensive in June 1916 , and a few months later , when the Romanian army made an attack into Transylvania , both of which were repelled . In comparison , of the total army , Hungary 's loss ratio was more than any other nations of Austria-Hungary . The Central Powers conquered Serbia . Romania declared war . The Central Powers conquered Southern Romania and the Romanian capital Bucharest . In 1916 Emperor Franz Joseph died , and the new monarch Charles IV of Hungary sympathized with the pacifists . With great difficulty , the Central powers stopped and repelled the attacks of the Russian Empire .
The Eastern front of the Allied ( Allies of World War I ) Powers completely collapsed . The Austro-Hungarian Empire then withdrew from all defeated countries . On the Italian front , the Austro-Hungarian army made no progress against Italy after January 1918 . Despite great Eastern successes , Germany suffered complete defeat on the more important Western front . By 1918 , the economic situation had deteriorated ( strikes in factories were organised by leftist and pacifist movements ) and uprisings in the army had become commonplace . In the capital cities , the Austrian and Hungarian leftist liberal movements ( the maverick parties ) and their leaders supported the separatism of ethnic minorities . Austria-Hungary signed a general armistice in Padua on 3 November 1918 . In October 1918 , Hungary 's union with Austria was dissolved .
=== Between the World Wars ( 19181941 ) ===
Following the First World War , Hungary underwent a period of profound political upheaval , beginning with the Aster Revolution in 1918 , which brought the social-democratic Mihly Krolyi to power as Prime Minister . The Royal Hungarian Honvd still had more than 1,400,000 soldiers when Mihly Krolyi was announced as prime minister of Hungary . Krolyi yielded to U.S. President Woodrow Wilson 's demand for pacifism by ordering the disarmament of the Hungarian army . This happened under the direction of Bla Linder , minister of war in the Krolyi government . Due to the full disarmament of its army , Hungary was to remain without a national defence at a time of particular vulnerability . During the rule of Krolyi 's pacifist cabinet , Hungary lost the control over approx . 75 % of its former pre-WW1 territories ( 325 411 ; km ) without fight and was subject to foreign occupation . The Little Entente , sensing an opportunity , invaded the country from three sidesRomania Hungarian-Romanian War Transylvania , Czechoslovakia annexed Upper Hungary ( today 's Slovakia ) , and a joint Kingdom of Serbia-French Army coalition annexed Vojvodina and other southern regions . In March 1919 , communists led by Bla Kun ousted the Krolyi government and proclaimed the Hungarian Soviet Republic ( Tancskztrsasg ) , followed by a thorough Red Terror ( Hungary ) campaign . Despite some successes on the Czechoslovak front , Kun 's forces were ultimately unable to resist the Romanian invasion ; by August 1919 , Romanian troops occupied Budapest and ousted Kun .
In November 1919 , rightist forces led by former Austro-Hungarian admiral Mikls Horthy entered Budapest ; exhausted by the war and its aftermath , the populace accepted Horthy 's leadership . In January 1920 , parliamentary elections were held and Horthy was proclaimed Regent of the reestablished Kingdom of Hungary ( 192046 ) , inaugurating the so-called `` Horthy era '' ( Horthy-kor ) . The new government worked quickly to normalize foreign relations while turning a blind eye to a White Terror ( Hungary ) that swept through the countryside ; extrajudicial killings of suspected communists and Jews lasted well into 1920 . On 4 June of that year , the Treaty of Trianon established new borders for Hungary . The country lost 71 % of its territory and 66 % of its antebellum population , as well as many sources of raw materials and its sole port , Rijeka . Though the revision of the Treaty quickly rose to the top of the national political agenda , the Horthy government was not willing to resort to military intervention to do so .
The initial years of the Horthy regime were preoccupied by putsch attempts by Charles IV of Hungary , the Austro-Hungarian pretender ; continued suppression of communists ; and a migration crisis triggered by the Trianon territorial changes . Though free elections continued , Horthy 's personality , and those of his personally selected prime ministers , dominated the political scene . The government 's actions continued to drift right with the passage of antisemitic laws and , due to the continued isolation of the Little Entente , economic and then political gravitation towards Kingdom of Italy # Fascist regime ( 19221943 ) and Nazi Germany . The Great Depression further exacerbated the situation and the popularity of fascist politicians such as Gyula Gmbs and Ferenc Szlasi , promising economic and social recovery , rose .
Horthy 's nationalist agenda reached its apogee in 1938 and 1940 , when the Nazis rewarded Hungary 's staunchly pro-Germany foreign policy in the First Vienna Award and Second Vienna Awards , respectively , peacefully restoring ethnic-Hungarian-majority areas lost after Trianon . In 1939 , Hungary regained further territory from Czechoslovakia Slovak-Hungarian War . Hungary Tripartite Pact the Axis Powers on 20 November 1940 , and in 1941 , participated in the German invasion of Yugoslavia , gaining some of its former territories in the south .
=== World War II ( 19411945 ) ===
Hungary formally entered World War II as an Axis Power on 26 June 1941 , declaring war on the Soviet Union after unidentified planes bombed Koice , Munkacheve , and Rakhiv . Hungarian troops fought on the Eastern Front ( World War II ) for two years . Despite Battle of Uman , the Hungarian government began seeking a secret peace pact with Allies ( World War II ) after the Hungarian Second Army suffered catastrophic losses OstrogozhskRossosh Offensive in January 1943 . Learning of the planned defection , German troops Operation Margarethe on 19 March 1944 to guarantee Horthy 's compliance . In October , as the Soviet front approached and the Hungarian government made further efforts to disengage from the war , German troops ousted Horthy and installed a puppet government under Szlasi 's fascist Arrow Cross Party . Szlasi pledged all the country 's capabilities in service of the German war machine . By October 1944 , the Soviets had reached the river Tisza , and despite Battle of Debrecen , succeeded in encircling and Battle of Budapest in December .
After German occupation , Hungary Holocaust in Hungary in the Holocaust . During the German occupation in MayJune 1944 , the Arrow Cross and Hungarian police deported nearly 440,000 Jews , mainly to Auschwitz concentration camp . Nearly all of them were murdered . The Swedish Diplomat Raoul Wallenberg managed to save a considerable number of Hungarian Jews by giving them Swedish passports . Rezs Kasztner , one of the leaders of the Hungarian Aid and Rescue Committee , bribed senior SS officers such as Adolf Eichmann to allow some Jews to escape . The Horthy government 's complicity in the Holocaust remains a point of controversy and contention .
The war left Hungary devastated , destroying over 60 % of the economy and causing significant World War II casualties # endnote Hungary . In addition to the over 600,000 Hungarian Jews killed , as many as 280,000 other Hungarians were raped , murdered and executed or deported for slave labour by Czechoslovaks , Soviet Red Army troops , and Yugoslavs .
On 13 February 1945 , Budapest surrendered ; by April , German troops left the country under Soviet military occupation . 200,000 Hungarians were expelled from Czechoslovakia in exchange for 70,000 Slovaks living in Hungary . 202,000 ethnic Germans were expelled to Germany , and through the 1947 Paris Peace Treaties , Hungary was again reduced to its immediate post-Trianon borders .
=== Communism ( 19451989 ) ===
Following the defeat of Nazi Germany , Hungary became a Soviet satellite of the Soviet Union . The Soviet leadership selected Mtys Rkosi to front the Stalinization of the country , and Rkosi de facto ruled Hungary from 1949 to 1956 . His government 's policies of militarization , industrialisation , collectivization , and war compensation led to a severe decline in living standards . In imitation of Stalin 's KGB , the Rkosi government established a secret political police , the State Protection Authority , to enforce the new regime . In the ensuing purges approximately 350,000 officials and intellectuals were imprisoned or executed from 1948 to 1956 . Many freethinkers , democrats , and Horthy-era dignitaries were secretly arrested and extrajudicially interned in domestic and foreign Gulags . Some 600,000 Hungarians were deported to Soviet labour camps , where at least 200,000 died .
After Stalin 's death in 1953 , the Soviet Union pursued a programme of destalinization that was inimical to Rkosi , leading to his deposition . The following political cooling saw the ascent of Imre Nagy to the premiership , and the growing interest of students and intellectuals in political life . Nagy promised market liberalization and political openness , while Rkosi opposed both vigorously . Rkosi eventually managed to discredit Nagy and replace him with the more hard-line Ern Ger . Hungary joined the Warsaw Pact in May 1955 , as societal dissatisfaction with the regime swelled . Following the firing on peaceful demonstrations by Soviet soldiers and secret police , and rallies throughout the country on 23 October 1956 , protesters took to the streets in Budapest , initiating the Hungarian Revolution of 1956 . In an effort to quell the chaos , Nagy returned as premier , promised free elections , and took Hungary out of the Warsaw Pact .
The violence nonetheless continued as revolutionary militias sprung up against the Soviet Army and the VH ; the roughly 3,000-strong resistance fought Soviet tanks using Molotov cocktails and machine-pistols . Though the preponderance of the Soviets was immense , they suffered heavy losses , and by 30 October 1956 , most Soviet troops had withdrawn from Budapest to garrison the countryside . For a time , the Soviet leadership was unsure how to respond to developments in Hungary but eventually decided to intervene to prevent a destabilization of the Soviet bloc . On 4 November , reinforcements of more than 150,000 troops and 2,500 tanks entered the country from the Soviet Union . Nearly 20,000 Hungarians were killed resisting the intervention , while an additional 21,600 were imprisoned afterwards for political reasons . Some 13,000 were interned and 230 brought to trial and executed . Nagy was secretly tried , found guilty , sentenced to death and executed by hanging in June 1958 . Because borders were briefly opened , nearly a quarter of a million people fled the country by the time the revolution was suppressed .
==== Kdr era ( 19561988 ) ====
After a second , briefer period of Soviet military occupation , Jnos Kdr , Nagy 's former Minister of State , was chosen by the Soviet leadership to head the new government and chair the new ruling Hungarian Socialist Workers ' Party Socialist Workers ' Party ( MSzMP ) . Kdr quickly normalized the situation . In 1963 , the government granted a general amnesty and released the majority of those imprisoned for their active participation in the uprising . Kdr proclaimed a new policy line , according to which the people were no longer compelled to profess loyalty to the party if they tacitly accepted the Socialist regime as a fact of life . In many speeches , he described this as , `` Those who are not against us are with us . '' Kdr introduced new planning priorities in the economy , such as allowing farmers significant plots of private land within the collective farm system ( hztji gazdlkods ) . The living standard rose as consumer good and food production took precedence over military production , which was reduced to one-tenth of pre-revolutionary levels .
In 1968 , the New Economic Mechanism ( NEM ) introduced free-market elements into socialist command economy . From the 1960s through the late 1980s , Hungary was often referred to as `` the happiest barrack '' within the Eastern bloc . During the latter part of the Cold War Hungary 's GDP per capita was fourth only to East Germany , Czechoslovak Socialist Republic , and the Soviet Union itself . As a result of this relatively high standard of living , a more liberalized economy , a less censored press , and less restricted travel rights , Hungary was generally considered one of the more liberal countries in which to live in Central Europe during communism . In the 1980s , however , living standards steeply declined again due to Early 1980s recession to which communism was unable to respond . By the time Kdr died in 1989 , the Soviet Union was in steep decline and a younger generation of reformists saw liberalization as the solution to economic and social issues .
=== Third Republic ( 1989present ) ===
Hungary 's fall of communism to democracy and capitalism ( rendszervlts , `` regime change '' ) was peaceful and prompted by economic stagnation , domestic political pressure , and changing relations with other Warsaw Pact countries . Although the MSzMP began Hungarian Round Table Talks with various opposition groups in March 1989 , the reburial of Imre Nagy as a revolutionary martyr that June is widely considered the symbolic end of communism in Hungary . Over 100,000 people attended the Budapest ceremony without any significant government interference , and many speakers openly called for Soviet troops to leave the country . Free elections were held 1990 Hungarian parliamentary election , and the Hungarian Democratic Forum , a major conservative opposition group , was elected to the head of a coalition government . Jzsef Antall became the first democratically elected Prime Minister since World War II .
With the removal of state subsidies and rapid privatization in 1991 , Hungary was affected by a severe economic recession . The Antall government 's austerity measures proved unpopular , and the Communist Party 's legal and political heir , the Hungarian Socialist Party , won the subsequent 1994 Hungarian parliamentary election . This abrupt shift in the political landscape was repeated in 1998 Hungarian parliamentary election and 2002 Hungarian parliamentary election ; each electoral cycle , the governing party was ousted and the erstwhile opposition elected . Like most other post-communist European states , however , Hungary broadly pursued an European integration agenda , Enlargement of NATO NATO in 1999 and the European Union 2003 Hungarian European Union membership referendum . As a NATO member , Hungary was involved in the Yugoslav Wars .
In 2006 , 2006 protests in Hungary erupted after it was revealed that Prime Minister Ferenc Gyurcsny had claimed in szd speech that Hungarian Socialist Party `` lied '' to win the 2006 Hungarian parliamentary election . The popularity of left-wing parties plummeted in the ensuing political upheaval , and in 2010 , Viktor Orbn 's national conservatism national-conservative Fidesz was 2010 Hungarian parliamentary election to a parliamentary supermajority . The legislature consequently approved a Constitution of Hungary , among other sweeping governmental and legal changes . Although these developments were met with and still engender controversy , Fidesz secured a second parliamentary supermajority 2014 Hungarian parliamentary election and a third 2018 Hungarian parliamentary election .
In September 2018 , the European parliament voted to act against Hungary , under the terms of Article 7 of the Treaty on European Union . Proponents of the vote claimed that the Hungarian government posed a Democratic backsliding `` systematic threat '' to democracy and the rule of law . The vote was carried with the support of 448 MEPs , narrowly clearing the two-thirds majority required . The vote marked the first the European parliament had triggered an article 7 procedure against an EU member state . Pter Szijjrt , the Minister of Foreign Affairs ( Hungary ) , described the vote as `` petty revenge '' which had been provoked by Hungary 's tough anti-migration policies . Szijjrt alleged that the vote was fraudulent because abstentions were not counted which made it easier to reach the two-thirds majority required to pass the vote .
At the European elections in May 2019 , Viktor Orbn 's Fidesz Party secured another a sweeping victory , receiving more than 50 % of the votes .
In March 2020 , during the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic in Hungary , the Hungarian parliament passed a law granting the Government the power to rule by decree to the extent it is necessary to diminish the consequences of the pandemic , suspending by-elections and outlawing the `` spreading of misinformation '' . The Government 's special authorisation is in force until the pandemic is declared to have ended . The law was lifted on 16 June 2020.
== Geography ==
Hungary 's geography has traditionally been defined by its two main waterways , the Danube and Tisza rivers . The common tripartite division of the country into three sectionsDunntl ( `` beyond the Danube '' , Transdanubia ) , Tiszntl ( `` beyond the Tisza '' ) , and Duna-Tisza kze ( `` between the Danube and Tisza '' ) is a reflection of this . The Danube flows northsouth right through the centre of contemporary Hungary , and the entire country lies within its drainage basin .
Transdanubia , which stretches westward from the centre of the country towards Austria , is a primarily hilly region with a terrain varied by low mountains . These include the very eastern stretch of the Alps , Alpokalja , in the west of the country , the Transdanubian Mountains in the central region of Transdanubia , and the Mecsek Mountains and Villny Mountains in the south . The highest point of the area is the rott-k in the Alps , at . The Little Hungarian Plain ( Kisalfld ) is found in northern Transdanubia . Lake Balaton and Lake Hvz , the largest lake in Central Europe and the largest thermal lake in the world , respectively , are in Transdanubia as well .
The Duna-Tisza kze and Tiszntl are characterised mainly by the Great Hungarian Plain ( Alfld ) , which stretches across most of the eastern and southeastern areas of the country . To the north of the Plain are the foothills of the Carpathian Mountains in a wide band near the Slovakian border . The Kkes at is the tallest mountain in Hungary and is found here .
Phytogeography , Hungary belongs to the Central European province of the Circumboreal Region within the Boreal Kingdom . According to the World Wide Fund for Nature , the territory of Hungary belongs to the terrestrial ecoregion of Pannonian mixed forests . It had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 2.25/10 , ranking it 156th globally out of 172 countries .
Hungary has 10 national parks , 145 minor nature reserves , and 35 landscape protection areas .
Hungary is a landlocked country .
=== Climate ===
Hungary has a Temperate climate , with generally warm summers with low overall humidity levels but frequent rainshowers and cold snowy winters . Average annual temperature is . Temperature extremes are on 20 July 2007 at Kiskunhalas in the summer and on 16 February 1940 Miskolc-Grmblytapolca in the winter . Average high temperature in the summer is and average low temperature in the winter is . The average yearly rainfall is approximately .
Hungary is ranked sixth in an environmental protection index by GW/Climate Action Network .
== Government and politics ==
Hungary is a Unitary state , parliamentary democratic , representative democracy parliamentary republic . The Hungarian political system operates under a framework reformed in 2012 ; this constitutional document is the Constitution of Hungary . Amendments generally require a two-thirds majority of parliament ; the fundamental principles of the constitution ( as expressed in the articles guaranteeing human dignity , the separation of powers , the state structure , and the rule of law ) are valid in perpetuity . 199 Members of Parliament ( orszggylsi kpvisel ) are elected to the highest organ of state authority , the Unicameralism National Assembly of Hungary ( National Assembly ) , every four years in a single-round first-past-the-post voting first-past-the-post election with an election threshold of 5 % .
The President of Hungary ( kztrsasgi elnk ) serves as the [ of state ] and is elected by the National Assembly every five years . The president is invested primarily with representative responsibilities and powers : receiving foreign heads of state , formally nominating the Prime Minister at the recommendation of the National Assembly , and serving as Commander-in-chief of the Hungarian Army . Importantly , the president is also invested with veto power , and may send legislation to the 15-member Constitutional Court of Hungary for review . The third most-significant governmental position in Hungary is the List of Speakers of the National Assembly ( Hungary ) , who is elected by the National Assembly and responsible for overseeing the daily sessions of the body .
The Prime Minister of Hungary ( miniszterelnk ) is elected by the National Assembly , serving as the [ of government ] and exercising Executive ( government ) . Traditionally , the Prime Minister is the leader of the largest party in parliament . The Prime Minister selects Government of Hungary ministers and has the exclusive right to dismiss them , although cabinet nominees must appear before consultative open hearings before one or more parliamentary committees , survive a vote in the National Assembly , and be formally approved by the president . The cabinet reports to National Assembly ( Hungary ) .
In 2009 Hungary , due to strong economic difficulties , had to request the help of the IMF for about 9 ; billion . The debt-to-GDP ratio of Hungary had its peak in 2011 when it stood at 83 % and decreased since then . According to Eurostat , the Government debt of Hungary amounts to 25.119 ; billion HUF or 74.1 % of its Gross domestic product in 2016 . The government achieved a budget deficit 1.9 % of the GDP in 2015 . Hungary 's credit rating by credit rating agencies Standard & Poor 's , Moody 's and Fitch Ratings stands at Investment Grade BBB with a stable outlook in 2016.
On Transparency International 's 2019 Corruption Perceptions Index Hungary 's public sector has deteriorated from a score of 51 in 2015 to 44 in 2019 making it the 2nd most corrupt EU member at pair with Romania and behind Bulgaria .
Following a decade of Fidesz-KDNP rule lead by Viktor Orbn , Freedom House 's Nations in Transit 2020 report reclassified Hungary from a democracy to a transitional or [ regime ] . According to the report , `` the right-wing alliance ... has gradually undermined the rule of law in Hungary and established tight control over the country  s independent institutions ... [ it ] has steadily rewritten the Hungarian constitution , and eliminated democratic safeguards statutorily embodied in the Constitutional Court , Prosecutors Office , Media Authority , and State Audit Office ... '' . It also limited parliamentary oversight , independent News media , non-governmental organizations and academic freedoms , while consolidating power around the central government .
=== Political parties ===
Since the fall of communism , Hungary has a multi-party system . The 2018 Hungarian parliamentary election took place on 8 April 2018 . This parliamentary election was the 7th since the 1990 Hungarian parliamentary election 1990 first multi-party election . The result was a victory for FideszChristian Democratic People 's Party ( Hungary ) alliance , preserving its two-thirds majority with Viktor Orbn remaining Prime Minister . It was the second election according to the new Constitution of Hungary which went into force on 1 January 2012 . The new electoral law also entered into force that day . The voters elected 199 MPs instead of previous 386 lawmakers . The current political landscape in Hungary is dominated by the conservative Fidesz , who have a near supermajority , and two medium-sized parties , the left-wing Democratic Coalition ( Hungary ) ( DK ) and liberal Momentum Movement .
The democratic character of the Hungarian parliament was reestablished with revolutions of 1989 and the end of communist dictatorship in 1989 . Today 's parliament is still called Orszggyls just like in royal times , but in order to differentiate between the historical royal diet is referred to as `` National Assembly '' now . The Diet of Hungary was a legislative institution in the Kingdom of Hungary in the Middle Ages from the 1290s , and in its successor states , Royal Hungary and the Lands of the Crown of Saint Stephen throughout the Early Modern period . The articles of the 1790 diet set out that the diet should meet at least once every 3 years , but , since the diet was called by the Habsburg monarchy , this promise was not kept on several occasions thereafter . As a result of the Austro-Hungarian Compromise of 1867 Austro-Hungarian Compromise , it was reconstituted in 1867 . The Latin term Natio Hungarica ( `` Hungarian nation '' ) was used to designate the political elite which had participation in the diet , consisting of the Hungarian nobility , the Catholic clergy , and a few enfranchised burghers , regardless of language or ethnicity .
=== Law and judicial system ===
The judicial system of Hungary is a Civil law ( legal system ) system divided between courts with regular civil and criminal jurisdiction and administrative courts with jurisdiction over litigation between individuals and the public administration . Hungarian law is codified and based on Law of Germany and in a wider sense , civil law or Roman law . The court system for civil and criminal jurisdiction consists of local courts ( jrsbrsg ) , regional appellate courts ( tltbla ) , and the supreme court ( Kria ) . Hungary 's highest courts are located in Budapest .
Law enforcement in Hungary is split among the Rendrsg and the National Tax and Customs Administration . The Hungarian Police is the main and largest state law enforcement agency in Hungary . It carries nearly all general police duties such as criminal investigation , patrol activity , traffic policing , border control . It is led by the National Police Commissioner under the control of the Ministry of Interior ( Hungary ) . The body is divided into county police departments which are also divided into regional and town police departments . The National Police also have subordinate agencies with nationwide jurisdiction , such as the `` Nemzeti Nyomoz Iroda '' ( National Bureau of Investigation ) , a civilian police force specialised in investigating serious crimes , and the gendarmerie-like , militarised `` Kszenlti Rendrsg '' ( Stand-by Police ) mainly dealing with riots and often reinforcing local police forces . Due to Hungary 's accession to the Schengen Treaty , the Police and Border Guards were merged into a single national corps , with the Border Guards becoming Police Officers . This merger took place in January 2008 . The Customs and Excise Authority remained subject to the Ministry of Finance under the National Tax and Customs Administration .
=== Administrative divisions ===
Hungary is a unitary state divided into 19 Counties of Hungary ( megye ) . In addition , the Capitals of Hungary ( fvros ) , Budapest , is an independent entity . The counties and the capital are the 20 Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics third-level units of Hungary . The states are further subdivided into 174 Districts of Hungary ( jrs ) . The districts are further divided into List of cities and towns of Hungary , of which 23 are designated Town with county rights ( megyei jog vros ) , sometimes known as `` urban counties '' in English . The local authorities of these towns have extended powers , but these towns belong to the territory of the respective district instead of being independent territorial units . County and district councils and municipalities have different roles and separate responsibilities relating to local government . The role of the counties are basically administrative and focus on strategic development , while preschools , public water utilities , garbage disposal , elderly care and rescue services are administered by the municipalities .
Since 1996 , the counties and City of Budapest have been grouped into seven Regions of Hungary for statistical and development purposes . These seven regions constitute Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics ' second-level units of Hungary . They are Central Hungary , Central Transdanubia , Northern Great Plain , Northern Hungary , Southern Transdanubia , Southern Great Plain , and Western Transdanubia .
=== Foreign relations ===
The foreign policy of Hungary is based on four basic commitments : to atlanticism Atlantic co-operation , to European integration , to international development and to international law . The Economy of Hungary is fairly open and relies strongly on international trade .
Hungary has been a member of the United Nations since December 1955 and a member of the European Union , NATO , the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development , the Visegrd Group , the WTO , the World Bank , the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank and the International Monetary Fund . Hungary took on the presidency of the Council of the European Union for half a year in 2011 and the next will be in 2024 . In 2015 , Hungary was the fifth largest OECD Non-DAC donor of development aid in the world , which represents List of development aid country donors 0.13 % of its Gross National Income .
Hungary 's capital city , Budapest , is home to more than 100 embassies and representative bodies as an international political actor . Hungary hosts the main and regional headquarters of many international organisations as well , including European Institute of Innovation and Technology , European Police College , United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees , Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations , International Centre for Democratic Transition , Institute of International Education , International Labour Organization , International Organization for Migration , International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies , Regional Environmental Center for Central and Eastern Europe , Danube Commission ( 1948 ) and others .
Since 1989 , Hungary 's top foreign policy goal has been achieving integration into Western economic and security organisations . Hungary joined the Partnership for Peace programme in 1994 and has actively supported the IFOR and SFOR missions in Bosnia . Hungary since 1989 has also improved its often frosty neighbourly relations by signing basic treaties with Romania , Slovakia , and Ukraine . These renounce all outstanding territorial claims and lay the foundation for constructive relations . However , the issue of Hungarian diaspora rights in Romania , Slovakia and Serbia periodically causes bilateral tensions to flare up . Since 2017 , the HungaryUkraine relations rapidly deteriorated over the issue of the Hungarians in Ukraine . Hungary since 1989 has signed all of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe documents , and served as the OSCE 's Chairman-in-Office in 1997.
=== Military ===
The List of heads of state of Hungary holds the title of commander-in-chief of the nation 's armed forces . The Minister of Defence ( Hungary ) jointly with General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Republic of Hungary administers the armed forces , including the Hungarian Ground Force and the Hungarian Air Force . Since 2007 , the Hungarian Armed Forces has been under a unified command structure . The Ministry of Defence maintains the political and civil control over the army . A subordinate Joint Forces Command coordinates and commands the HDF . In 2016 , the armed forces had 31,080 personnel on active duty , the operative reserve brought the total number of troops to fifty thousand . In 2016 , it was planned that military spending the following year would be $ 1.21 ; billion , about 0.94 % of the country 's GDP , well below the NATO target of 2 % . In 2012 , the government adopted a resolution in which it pledged to increase defence spending to 1.4 % of GDP by 2022.
Military service is voluntary , though conscription may occur in wartime . In a significant move for modernisation , Hungary decided in 2001 to buy 14 JAS 39 Gripen fighter aircraft for about 800 ; million EUR . Hungarian National Cyber Security Center was re-organised in 2016 in order to become more efficient through cyber security .
In 2016 , the Hungarian military had about 700 troops stationed in foreign countries as part of international peacekeeping forces , including 100 HDF troops in the NATO-led ISAF force in Afghanistan , 210 Hungarian soldiers in Kosovo under command of Kosovo Force , and 160 troops in Bosnia and Herzegovina . Hungary sent a 300-strong logistics unit to Iraq in order to help the US occupation with armed transport convoys , though public opinion opposed the country 's participation in the war . One soldier was killed in action by a roadside bomb while serving in Iraq .
During the 18th and 19th century , Hussar rose to international fame and served as a model for light cavalry in many European countries . In 184849 , Hungarian forces achieved successes against better-trained and equipped Austrian forces , despite the Austrian advantage in numbers . In 1872 , the Ludovica Military Academy officially began training cadets . By 1873 , the Hungarian military consisted of over 2,800 officers and 158,000 men organised into eighty-six infantry battalions and fifty-eight mounted squadrons . During World War I , out of the eight million men mobilized by Austro Hungarian Empire , over one million died . During the 1930s and early 1940s , Hungary was preoccupied with regaining the territories and population lost as a result of the Trianon peace treaty at Versailles in 1920 . Conscription was introduced on a national basis in 1939 . The peacetime strength of the Royal Hungarian Army grew to 80,000 men organised into seven corps commands . During World War II , the Hungarian Second Army was heavily depleted fighting on the banks of the Don River ( Russia ) in December 1942 during the Battle for Stalingrad . During the Socialist and the Warsaw Pact era ( 19471989 ) , the entire 200,000 strong Southern Group of Forces was garrisoned in Hungary , complete with artillery , tank regiments , air force and missile troops with nuclear weapons .
== Economy ==
Hungary is an OECD [ economy high-income ] mixed economy with List of countries by Human Development Index and skilled labour force with the List of countries by income equality in the world . Furthermore , it is the List of countries by economic complexity according to the Economic Complexity Index . The Hungarian is the List of countries by GDP ( PPP ) 57th-largest economy in the world ( out of 188 countries measured by IMF ) with $ 265.037 ; billion output , and ranks List of countries by GDP ( PPP ) per capita measured by purchasing power parity . Hungary is an export-oriented market economy with a heavy emphasis on foreign trade , thus the country is the List of countries by exports in the world . The country has more than $ 100 ; billion export in 2015 with high , $ 9.003 ; billion Balance of trade , of which 79 % went to the EU and 21 % was extra-EU trade . Hungary has a more than 80 % Private sector economy with List of countries by tax revenue as percentage of GDP 39,1 % overall taxation , which provides the basis for the country 's Welfare state . On the expenditure side , [ consumption ] is the main component of GDP and accounts for 50 percent of its total use , followed by gross fixed capital formation with 22 percent and government expenditure with 20 percent . Hungary continues to be one of the leading nations for attracting foreign direct investment in Central and Eastern Europe , the inward FDI in the country was $ 119.8 ; billion in 2015 , while Hungary invests more than $ 50 ; billion abroad . , the key trading partners of Hungary were Germany , Austria , Romania , Slovakia , France , Italy , Poland and Czech Republic . Major industries include food processing , pharmaceuticals , motor vehicles , information technology , chemicals , metallurgy , machinery , electrical goods , and tourism ( in 2014 Hungary welcomed 12.1 ; million international tourists ) .
Hungary is the largest electronics producer in Central and Eastern Europe . Electronics manufacturing and research are among the main drivers of innovation and economic growth in the country . In the past 20 years Hungary has also grown into a major centre for mobile technology , information security , and related hardware research .
The employment rate in the economy was 68.3 % in 2017 , the employment structure shows the characteristics of Post-industrial society post-industrial economies , 63.2 % of employed workforce work in service sector , the industry contributed by 29.7 % , while agriculture with 7.1 % . Unemployment rate was 4.1 % in 2017 September , down from 11 % during the financial crisis of 200708 .
Hungary is part of the Internal market which represents more than 508 ; million consumers . Several domestic commercial policies are determined by agreements among European Union members and by EU legislation .
Large List of companies of Hungary are included in the BUX , the Hungarian stock market index listed on Budapest Stock Exchange . Well-known companies include the Fortune Global 500 firm MOL Group , the OTP Bank , Gedeon Richter Plc. , Magyar Telekom , CIG Pannonia , FHB Mortgage Bank , Zwack liqueur and more . Besides this Hungary has a large portion of specialised small and medium enterprise , for example a significant number of automotive suppliers and technology Startup company among others .
Budapest is the financial and business capital of Hungary . The capital is a significant economic hub , classified as an Alpha  world city in the study by the Globalization and World Cities Research Network and it is the second fastest-developing urban economy in Europe as GDP per capita in the city increased by 2.4 per cent and employment by 4.7 per cent compared to the previous year in 2014 . On the national level , Budapest is the primate city of Hungary regarding business and economy , accounting for 39 % of the national income , the city has a gross metropolitan product more than $ 100 ; billion in 2015 , making it one of the largest regional economies in the European Union . Budapest is also among the Top 100 GDP performing cities in the world , measured by PricewaterhouseCoopers and in a global city competitiveness ranking by Economist Intelligence Unit , Budapest stands before Tel Aviv , Lisbon , Moscow and Johannesburg among others . Furthermore , Hungary 's corporate tax rate is only 9 % , which is relatively low for EU states .
Hungary maintains its own currency , the Hungarian forint ] ( HUF ) , although the economy fulfills the [ [ Maastricht criteria with the exception of public debt , List of countries by public debt with the level of 75.3 % in 2015 . The Hungarian National Bankfounded in 1924 , after the dissolution of Austria-Hungary Austro-Hungarian Empireis currently focusing on price stability with an inflation target of 3 % .
===Science and technology===
Hungary 's achievements in science and technology have been significant , and research and development efforts form an integral part of the Economy of Hungary country 's economy . Hungary spent 1.4 % of its gross domestic product ( GDP ) on civil research and development in 2015 , which is the List of countries by research and development spending . Hungary ranks 32nd among the most innovative countries in the Bloomberg Innovation Index , standing before Hong Kong , Iceland or Malta . The Global Innovation Index places Hungary 33rd among the countries of the world in 2016 . In 2014 , Hungary counted 2,651 full-time equivalent researchers per million inhabitants , steadily increasing from 2,131 in 2010 and compares with 3,984 in the US or 4,380 in Germany . Hungary 's [ tech ] nology industry has benefited from both the country 's skilled workforce and the strong presence of foreign high-tech firms and Research center . Hungary also has one of the highest rates of filed patents , the sixth highest ratio of high-tech and medium high-tech output in the total industrial output , the 12th highest research Foreign direct investment inflow , placed 14th in research talent in business enterprise and has the 17th best overall innovation efficiency ratio in the world .
The key actor of research and development in Hungary is the National Research , Development and Innovation Office ( NRDI Office ) , which is a national strategic and Funding of science funding agency for scientific research , development and innovation , the primary source of advice on RDI policy for the Government of Hungary , and the primary RDI funding agency . Its role is to develop RDI policy and ensure that Hungary adequately invest in RDI by funding excellent research and supporting innovation to increase competitiveness and to prepare the RDI strategy of the Hungarian Government , to handle the National Research , Development and Innovation Fund , and represents the Hungarian Government and a Hungarian RDI community in international organisations .
Scientific research in the country is supported partly by industry and partly by the state , through the List of universities in Hungary and by scientific state-institutions such as Hungarian Academy of Sciences . Hungary has been the home of some of the most prominent researchers in various scientific disciplines , notably physics , mathematics , chemistry and engineering . As of 2018 , List of Hungarian Nobel laureates have been recipients of a Nobel Prize . Until 2012 three individuals : Csoma , Jnos Bolyai and Tihanyi were included in the UNESCO Memory of the world register as well as the collective contributions : Tabula Hungariae and Bibliotheca Corviniana . Contemporary , internationally well-known Hungarian scientists include : mathematician Lszl Lovsz , physicist Albert-Lszl Barabsi , physicist Ferenc Krausz , and biochemist rpd Pusztai . Hungary is famous for its excellent mathematics education which has trained numerous outstanding scientists . Famous Hungarian mathematicians include father Farkas Bolyai and son Jnos Bolyai , who was one of the founders of non-Euclidean geometry ; Paul Erds , famed for publishing in over forty languages and whose Erds numbers are still tracked , and John von Neumann , a key contributor in the fields of quantum mechanics and game theory , a pioneer of digital computing , and the chief mathematician in the Manhattan Project . Notable Hungarian inventions include the lead dioxide match ( Jnos Irinyi ) , a type of carburetor ( Dont Bnki , Jnos Csonka ) , the electric ( AC ) train engine and generator ( Klmn Kand ) , [ ( Dennis Gabor ] ) , the [ [ Kalman filter ( Rudolf E. Klmn ) , and Rubik 's Cube ( Ern Rubik ) .
=== Transport ===
Hungary has a highly developed road , railway , air and water transport system . Budapest , the capital , serves as an important hub for the Hungarian State Railways ( MV ) . The capital is served by three large train stations called Eastern Railway Station ( Budapest ) ( Eastern ) , Western Railway Station ( Budapest ) ( Western ) , and Southern Railway Station ( Budapest ) ( Southern ) plyaudvars . Szolnok is the most important railway hub outside Budapest , while Tiszai Railway Station in Miskolc and the main stations of Szombathely , Gyr , Szeged , and Szkesfehrvr are also key to the network .
Budapest , Debrecen , Miskolc , and Szeged have tram networks . The Budapest Metro is the second-oldest underground rapid transit system in the world ; its Line 1 ( Budapest Metro ) dates from 1896 . The system consists of four lines . A regional rail system , HV , operates in the Budapest metropolitan area .
Hungary has a total length of approximately motorways ( autplya ) . Motorway sections are being added to the existing network , which already connects many major economically important cities to the capital .
The most important port is Budapest . Other important ones include Dunajvros and Baja , Hungary .
There are five international airports in Hungary : Budapest Liszt Ferenc International Airport ( informally called `` Ferihegy '' after its previous name ) , Debrecen International Airport , Srmellk International Airport ( also called Hvz-Balaton Airport ) , Gyr-Pr International Airport Gyr-Pr , and Pcs-Pogny International Airport Pcs-Pogny . The national carrier , Malv Hungarian Airlines , operated flights to over 60 , mostly European cities , but ceased operations in 2012 . Low-budget airline WizzAir is based in Hungary , at Ferihegy .
== Demographics ==
Hungary 's population was 9,937,628 according to the 2011 census , making it the fifth most populous country in Central and Eastern Europe and Demographics of the European Union medium-sized member state of the European Union . Population density stands at 107 inhabitants per square kilometre , which is about two times higher than the List of sovereign states and dependent territories by population density . More than one quarter of the population lived in the Budapest metropolitan area , 6,903,858 people ( 69.5 % ) in List of cities and towns of Hungary overall .
Like most other European countries , Hungary is experiencing sub-replacement fertility ; its estimated total fertility rate of 1.43 children per woman is well below the replacement rate of 2.1 , albeit higher than its nadir of 1.28 in 1999 , and remains considerably below the high of 5.59 children born per woman in 1884 . As a result , its population has been gradually declining and rapidly ageing . In 2011 , the conservative government began a programme to increase the birth rate with a focus on ethnic Magyars by reinstating 3 year maternity leave as well as boosting part-time jobs . The fertility rate has gradually increased from 1.27 children born/woman in 2011 . The natural decrease in the first 10 months of 2016 was only 25,828 which was 8,162 less than the corresponding period in 2015 . In 2015 , 47.9 % of births were to unmarried women . Hungary has one of the oldest populations in the world , with the average age of 42.7 years . Life expectancy was 71.96 years for men and 79.62 years for women in 2015 , growing continuously since the End of Communism in Hungary ( 1989 ) .
Hungary recognises two sizeable minority groups , designated as `` national minorities '' because their ancestors have lived in their respective regions for centuries in Hungary : a Germans of Hungary of about 130,000 that lives throughout the country , and a Romani people in Hungary numerous around 300,000 that mainly resides in Northern Hungary . Some studies indicate a considerably larger number of Romani in Hungary ( 876,000 people  c. 9 % of the population. ) . According to the 2011 census , there were 8,314,029 ( 83.7 % ) ethnic Hungarians , 308,957 ( 3.1 % ) Romani people , 131,951 ( 1.3 % ) Germans , 29,647 ( 0.3 % ) Slovaks , 26,345 ( 0.3 % ) Romanians , and 23,561 ( 0.2 % ) Croats in Hungary ; 1,455,883 people ( 14.7 % of the total population ) did not declare their ethnicity . Thus , Hungarians made up more than 90 % of people who declared their ethnicity . In Hungary , people can declare more than one ethnicity , so the sum of ethnicities is higher than the total population .
Today approximately Hungarian diaspora 5 ; million Hungarians live outside Hungary .
=== Urbanization ===
Hungary has 3,152 localities as of July 15 , 2013 . 346 towns ( Hungarian term : vros , plural : vrosok ; the terminology does n't distinguish between city and towns  the term town is used in official translations ) and 2,806 villages ( Hungarian : kzsg , plural : kzsgek ) . The number of towns can change , since villages can be elevated to town status by act of the President . The capital Budapest has a special status and is not included in any county while 23 of the towns are so-called urban counties ( megyei jog vros  town with county rights ) . All county seats except Budapest are urban counties .
Four of the cities ( Budapest , Miskolc , Gyr , and Pcs ) have agglomerations , and the Hungarian Statistical Office distinguishes seventeen other areas in earlier stages of agglomeration development .
The largest city is the capital , Budapest , the smallest town is Plhza with 1038 inhabitants ( 2010 ) . The largest village is Solymr ( population : 10,123 as of 2010 ) There are more than 100 villages with fewer than 100 inhabitants while the smallest villages have fewer than 20 inhabitants .
=== Languages ===
Hungarian language is the official language and predominant spoken language in Hungary . Hungarian is the Languages of Europe with around 13 ; million native speakers and it is one of 24 official and working languages of the European Union . Outside Hungary it is also spoken by communities of Hungarian people in neighbouring countries and by Hungarian diaspora communities worldwide . According to the 2011 census , 9,896,333 people ( 99.6 % ) speak Hungarian in Hungary , of whom 9,827,875 people ( 99 % ) speak it as a first language , while 68,458 people ( 0.7 % ) speak it as a second language . English ( 1,589,180 speakers , 16.0 % ) , and German ( 1,111,997 speakers , 11.2 % ) are the most widely spoken foreign languages , while there are several recognised minority languages in Hungary ( Armenian language , Bulgarian language , Croatian language , German language , Greek language , Romanian language , Romani language , Rusyn language , Serbian language , Slovak language , Slovenian language , and Ukrainian language ) .
Hungarian ( Magyar ) is a member of the Uralic languages , unrelated to any neighbouring language and distantly related to Finnish language and Estonian language . It is the largest of the Uralic languages in terms of the number of speakers and the only one spoken in Central Europe . There are sizeable populations of Hungarian speakers in Romania , the Czech and Slovak Republics , the former Yugoslavia , Ukraine , Israel , and the U.S . Smaller groups of Hungarian speakers live in Canada , Slovenia , and Austria , but also in Australia , Brazil , Argentina , Mexico , Venezuela and Chile . Standard Hungarian is based on the variety spoken in the capital of Budapest , although use of the standard dialect is enforced , Hungarian has a number of urban and rural dialects .
=== Religion ===
Hungary is a historically Christianity country . Hungarian historiography identifies the foundation of the Hungarian state with Stephen I of Hungary Stephen I 's baptism and coronation with the Szentkorona in A.D. 1000 . Stephen promulgated Roman Catholicism as the state religion , and his successors were traditionally known as the Apostolic Kings . The Catholic Church in Hungary remained strong through the centuries , and the Archbishop of Esztergom was granted extraordinary temporal privileges as prince-primate ( hercegprms ) of Hungary .
Although contemporary Hungary has no official religion and recognises freedom of religion as a fundamental right , the Hungarian constitution `` recognizes Christianity 's nation-building role '' in its preamble and in Article VII affirms that `` the state may cooperate with the churches for community goals . ''
The 2011 census showed that the majority of Hungarians were Christians ( 54.2 % ) , with Catholic Church in Hungary ( Katolikusok ) ( 37.1 % ) and Hungarian Reformed Calvinists ( Reformtusok ) ( 11.1 % ) making up the bulk of these alongside Lutherans ( Evanglikusok ) ( 2.2 % ) , Greek Catholics ( 1.8 % ) , and other Christians ( 1.3 % ) . Jewish ( 0.1 % ) , Buddhist ( 0.1 % ) and Muslim ( 0.06 % ) communities are in the minority . 27.2 % of the population did not declare a religious affiliation while 16.7 % declared themselves explicitly irreligious , another 1.5 % atheist .
During the initial stages of the Protestant Reformation , most Hungarians adopted first Lutheranism and then Calvinism in the form of the Hungarian Reformed Church . In the second half of the 16th century , the Jesuits led a Counterreformation campaign and the population once again became predominantly Catholic . This campaign was only partially successful , however , and the ( mainly Reformed ) Hungarian nobility were able to secure freedom of worship for Christians . In practice this meant cuius regio , eius religio ; thus , most individual localities in Hungary are still identifiable as historically Catholic , Lutheran , or Reformed . The country 's eastern regions , especially around Debrecen ( the `` Calvinist Rome '' ) , remain almost completely Reformed , a trait they share with historically contiguous Hungarians in Romania across the Romanian border .
Eastern Orthodox Church in Hungary is associated with the country 's ethnic minorities : Armenians , Bulgarians , Greeks , Romanians , Rusyns , Ukrainians , and Serbs .
Historically , Hungary was home to a History of the Jews in Hungary with a pre-World War II population of more than 800,000 , but it is estimated that just over 564,000 Hungarian Jews were killed between 1941 and 1945 during the Holocaust in Hungary . Between 15 May and 9 July 1944 alone , over 434,000 Jews were deported on 147 trains , most of them to Auschwitz , where about 80 percent were gassed on arrival . Some Jews were able to escape , but most were either deported to concentration camps , where they were killed , or murdered in Hungary by Arrow Cross Party members . From over 800,000 Jews living within Hungary 's borders in 19411944 , about 255,500 are thought to have survived . There are about 120,000 Jews in Hungary today .
=== Education ===
Education in Hungary is predominantly public , run by the Minister of Education ( Hungary ) . Preschool-kindergarten education is compulsory education and provided for all children between three and six years old , after which school attendance is also compulsory education until the age of sixteen . Primary education usually lasts for eight years . Secondary education includes three traditional types of schools focused on different academic levels : the Gymnasium ( school ) enrolls the most gifted children and prepares students for university studies ; the secondary vocational schools for intermediate students lasts four years and the technical school prepares pupils for vocational training and the world of work . The system is partly flexible and bridges exist , graduates from a vocational school can achieve a two years programme to have access to vocational higher education for instance . The Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study ( TIMSS ) rated 1314-year-old pupils in Hungary among the bests in the world for maths and science .
Most of the List of universities in Hungary are public university , and students traditionally study without fee payment . The general requirement for university is the Matura . The Hungarian public [ education ] system includes universities and other higher education institutes , that provide both education curricula and related degrees up to doctoral degree and also contribute to research activities . Health insurance for students is free until the end of their studies . English and German language is important in Hungarian higher education , there are a number of degree programmes that are taught in these languages , which attracts thousands of Student exchange program every year . Hungary 's higher education and training has been ranked 44 out of 148 countries in the Global Competitiveness Report 2014.
Hungary has a long tradition of higher education reflecting the existence of established knowledge economy . The established List of universities in Hungary include some of the List of oldest universities in continuous operation , the first was the University of Pcs founded in 1367 which is still functioning , although , in the year 1276 , the university of Veszprm was destroyed by the troops of Peter I Csk , but it was never rebuilt . Sigismund established buda University in 1395 . Another , Universitas Istropolitana , was established 1465 in Pozsony by Mattias Corvinus .
Nagyszombat University was founded in 1635 and moved to Buda in 1777 and it is called Etvs Lornd University today . The world 's first institute of technology was founded in Selmecbnya , Kingdom of Hungary in 1735 , its legal successor is the University of Miskolc . The Budapest University of Technology and Economics is considered the oldest institute of technology in the world with university rank and structure , its legal predecessor the Institutum Geometrico-Hydrotechnicum was founded in 1782 by Joseph II , Holy Roman Emperor .
Hungary ranks fourth ( above neighbour Romania , and after China , the United States and Russia ) in the all-time medal count at the International Mathematical Olympiad with 336 total medals , dating back to 1959.
=== Health ===
Hungary maintains a universal health care system largely financed by government national health insurance . According to the OECD , 100 % of the population is List of countries by health insurance coverage , which is absolutely free for children , students , pensioners , Poverty , Disability , and church employees . Hungary spends 7.2 % of GDP on healthcare , spending $ 2,045 per capita , of which $ 1,365 is provided by the government .
Hungary is one of the main destinations of medical tourism in Europe , particularly in dental tourism , in which its share is 42 % in Europe and 21 % worldwide . Plastic surgery is also a key sector , with 30 % of the clients coming from abroad . Hungary is well known for its spa culture and is home to Culture of Hungary # Spa culture , which attract `` spa tourism '' .
In common with other developed countries , cardiovascular disease is a leading cause of mortality , accounting for 49.4 % ( 62,979 ) of all deaths in 2013 . However , this number peaked in 1985 with 79,355 deaths , and has been declining continuously since the fall of Communism . The second leading cause of death is cancer with 33,274 ( 26.2 % ) , which has been stagnant since the 1990s . Deaths from accidents dropped from 8,760 in 1990 to 3,654 in 2013 ; the number of suicides has declined precipitously from 4,911 in 1983 to 2,093 in 2013 ( 21.1 per 100,000 people ) , the lowest since 1956 . There are considerable health disparities between the western and eastern parts of Hungary ; [ disease ] , [ stroke ] , and [ [ suicide is prevalent in the mostly agricultural and low-income Great Hungarian Plain region in the east , but infrequent in the high-income , middle class areas of Western Transdanubia and Central Hungary .
Smoking is a leading cause of death in the country , although it is in steep decline : The proportion of adult smokers declined to 19 % in 2013 from 28 % in 2012 , owing to strict regulations such as a nationwide smoking ban in every indoor public place and the limiting of tobacco sales to state-controlled `` National Tobacco Shops '' .
Hungary ranks as the Global Peace Index in the world , with a homicide rate of 1.3 per 100,000 people .
== Culture ==
=== Architecture ===
Hungary is home to the largest synagogue in Europe ( Dohny Street Synagogue ) , built in 1859 in Moorish Revival style with a capacity of 3,000 people , the largest medicinal bath in Europe ( Szchenyi Medicinal Bath ) , completed in 1913 in Modern Renaissance Style and located in the Budapest city park , the biggest building in Hungary with its length ( the Parliament building ) , one of the largest basilicas in Europe ( Esztergom Basilica ) , the second largest territorial abbey in the world ( Pannonhalma Archabbey ) , and the largest early Christian necropolis outside Italy ( Pcs ) .
Notable architectural styles in Hungary include Historicism and Art Nouveau , or rather several variants of Art Nouveau . In contrast to Historicism , Hungarian Art Nouveau is based on the national architectural characteristics . Taking the eastern origins of the Hungarians into account , dn Lechner ( 18451914 ) , the most important figure in Hungarian Art Nouveau , was initially inspired by Indian and Syrian architecture , and later by traditional Hungarian decorative designs . In this way , he created an original synthesis of architectural styles . By applying them to three-dimensional architectural elements , he produced a version of Art Nouveau that was specific to Hungary .
Turning away from the style of Lechner , yet taking inspiration from his approach , the group of `` Young People '' ( Fiatalok ) , which included Kroly Ks and Dezs Zrumeczky , were to use the characteristic structures and forms of traditional Hungarian architecture to achieve the same end .
Besides the two principal styles , Budapest also displays local versions of trends originating from other European countries . The Sezession from Vienna , the German Jugendstil , Art Nouveau from Belgium and France , and the influence of English and Finnish architecture are all reflected in the buildings constructed at the turn of the 20th century . Bla Lajta initially adopted Lechner 's style , subsequently drawing his inspiration from English and Finnish trends ; after developing an interest in the Ancient Egypt style , he finally arrived at modern architecture . Aladr rkay took almost the same route . Istvn Medgyaszay developed his own style , which differed from Lechner 's , using stylised traditional motifs to create decorative designs in concrete . In the sphere of applied arts , those chiefly responsible for promoting the spread of Art Nouveau were the School and Museum of Decorative Arts , which opened in 1896.
Foreigners have unexpectedly `` discovered '' that a significantly large portion of the citizens live in old and architecturally valuable buildings . In the Budapest downtown area almost all the buildings are about one hundred years old , with thick walls , high ceilings , and motifs on the front wall .
=== Music ===
Hungarian music consists mainly of traditional Hungarian folk music and music by prominent composers such as Liszt and Bartk , considered to be among the greatest Hungarian composers . Other renowned composers are Ern Dohnnyi , Franz Schmidt , Zoltn Kodly , Gabriel von Wayditch , Rudolf Wagner-Rgeny , Lszl Lajtha , Franz Lehr , Imre Klmn , Sndor Veress and Mikls Rzsa . Hungarian traditional music tends to have a strong dactyl ( poetry ) rhythm , as the language is invariably stressed on the first syllable of each word .
Hungary has renowned composers of contemporary classical music , Gyrgy Ligeti , Gyrgy Kurtg , Peter Etvs , Zoltn Kodly and Zoltn Jeney among them . One of the greatest Hungarian composers , Bla Bartk , was also among the most significant musicians of the 20th century . His music was invigorated by the themes , modes , and rhythmic patterns of the Hungarian and neighbouring folk music traditions he studied , which he synthesised with influences from his contemporaries into his own distinctive style .
Hungary has made many contributions to the fields of folk music , popular music and european classical music . Hungarian folk music is a prominent part of the national identity and continues to play a major part in Hungarian music . Hungarian folk music has been significant in former country parts that belong ;  since the 1920 Treaty of Trianon ;  to neighbouring countries such as Romania , Slovakia , Poland and especially in southern Slovakia and Transylvania ; both regions have significant numbers of Hungarians .
After the establishment of a music academy led by Ferenc Erkel and Franz Liszt Hungary produced an important number of art musicians :
* Pianists : Ern von Dohnnyi , Ervin Nyiregyhzi , Andor Fldes , Tams Vsry , Gyrgy Sndor , Gza Anda , Annie Fischer , Gyrgy Cziffra , Edward Kilenyi , Balint Vazsonyi , Andrs Schiff , Zoltn Kocsis , Dezs Rnki , Jen Jand and others .
* Violists : Joseph Joachim , Leopold Auer , Jen Hubay , Jelly d'Arnyi , Joseph Szigeti , Sndor Vgh , Emil Telmanyi , Zathurecky , Zsigmondy , Franz von Vecsey , Zoltn Szkely , Tibor Varga ( violinist ) and newcomers Antal Szalai , Vilmos Szabadi , Kristf Barti ( b . 79 ) and others .
* Opera singers : Astrid Varnay , Jzsef Simndy , Jlia Vrady , Julia Hamari , Kolos Kovts ( Bluebeard in Bartk 's Bluebeard )
* Conductors : Eugene Ormandy , George Szell , Antal Dorti , Jnos Ferencsik , Fritz Reiner , sir Georg Solti , Istvn Kertsz ( conductor ) , Ferenc Fricsay , Zoltn Rozsnyai , Sndor Vgh , Arpad Joo , dm Fischer , Ivn Fischer , Pter Etvs , Zoltn Kocsis , Tams Vsry , Gilbert Varga and others
* String Quartets : Budapest Quartet , Hungarian Quartet , Vgh Quartet , Takcs Quartet , Kodly Quartet , der Quartet , Festetics Quartet ,
Broughton claims that Hungary 's `` infectious sound has been surprisingly influential on neighboring countries ( thanks perhaps to the common Austro-Hungarian history ) and it 's not uncommon to hear Hungarian-sounding tunes in Romania , Slovakia and Poland '' .Refers to the country as `` widely considered '' to be a `` home of music '' . It is also strong in the Szabolcs-Szatmr-Bereg Szabolcs-Szatmr area and in the southwest part of Transdanubia , near the border with Croatia . The Busjrs carnival in Mohcs is a major Hungarian folk music event , formerly featuring the long-established and well-regarded Bogyiszl orchestra .
Hungarian European classical music has long been an `` experiment , made from Hungarian antecedents and on Hungarian soil , to create a conscious musical culture [ using the ] musical world of the folk song '' . `` Every experiment , made from Hungarian antecedents and on Hungarian soil , to create a conscious musical culture ( music written by composers , as different from folk music ) , had instinctively or consciously striven to develop widely and universally the musical world of the folk song . Folk poetry and folk music were deeply embedded in the collective Hungarian people 's culture , and this unity did not cease to be effective even when it was given from and expression by individual creative artists , performers and poets . '' Although the Hungarian upper class has long had cultural and political connections with the rest of Europe , leading to an influx of European musical ideas , the rural peasants maintained their own traditions such that by the end of the 19th century Hungarian composers could draw on rural peasant music to ( re ) create a Hungarian classical style . For example , Bartk collected folk songs from across Central and Eastern Europe , including Romania and Slovakia , while Kodly was more interested in creating a distinctively Hungarian musical style .
During the era of communist rule in Hungary ( 19441989 ) , a Song Committee scoured and censored popular music for traces of subversion and ideological impurity . Since then , however , the Hungarian music industry has begun to recover , producing successful performers in the fields of jazz such as trumpeter Rudolf Tomsits , pianist-composer Kroly Binder and , in a modernised form of Hungarian folk , Ferenc Seb and Mrta Sebestyn . The three giants of Hungarian rock , Ills ( band ) , Metr ( band ) and Omega ( band ) , remain very popular , especially Omega , which has followings in Germany and beyond as well as in Hungary . Older veteran underground bands such as Beatrice ( band ) , from the 1980s , also remain popular .
=== Literature ===
In the earliest times , Hungarian language was written in a Old Hungarian script runic-like script ( although it was not used for literature purposes in the modern interpretation ) . The country switched to the Latin alphabet after being Christianized under the reign of Stephen I of Hungary ( 10001038 ) .
The oldest remained written record in Hungarian language is a fragment in the Establishing charter of the abbey of Tihany ( 1055 ) which contains several Hungarian terms , among them the words feheruuaru rea meneh hodu utu rea , `` up the military road to Szkesfehrvr '' The rest of the document was written in Latin .
The oldest remaining complete text in Hungarian language is the Funeral Sermon and Prayer ( Halotti beszd s knyrgs ) ( 11921195 ) , a translation of a Latin sermon .
The oldest remaining poem in Hungarian is the Old Hungarian 'Lamentations of Mary ' ( magyar Mria-siralom ) , also a ( not very strict ) translation from Latin , from the 13th century . It is also the oldest surviving Uralic languages poem .
Among the first chronicles about Hungarian history were Gesta Hungarorum ( `` Deeds of the Hungarians '' ) by the unknown author usually called Anonymus , and Gesta Hunnorum et Hungarorum ( `` Deeds of the Huns and the Hungarians '' ) by Simon Kzai . Both are in Latin . These chronicles mix history with legends , so historically they are not always authentic . Another chronicle is the Kpes krnika ( Illustrated Chronicle ) , which was written for Louis I of Hungary .
Renaissance literature flourished under the reign of Matthias Corvinus of Hungary ( 14581490 ) . Janus Pannonius , although he wrote in Latin , counts as one of the most important persons in Hungarian literature , being the only significant Hungarian Humanist poet of the period . The first printing house was also founded during Matthias ' reign , by Andrs Hess , in Buda . The first book printed in Hungary was the Chronica Hungarorum .
The most important poets of the period was Blint Balassi ( 15541594 ) and Nikola Zrinski ( 16201664 ) .
Balassi 's poetry shows medieval influences , his poems can be divided into three sections : love poems , war poems and religious poems . Zrnyi 's most significant work , the epic Peril of Sziget ( `` Peril of Sziget '' , written in 1648/49 ) is written in a fashion similar to the Iliad , and recounts the heroic Battle of Szigetvr , where his great-grandfather died while defending the castle of Szigetvr .
Among the religious literary works the most important is the Bible translation by Gspr Kroli ( The second Hungarian Bible translation in the history ) , the Protestant pastor of Gnc , in 1590 . The translation is called the Bible of Vizsoly , after the town where it was first published . ( See Bible translations into Hungarian for more details . )
The Hungarian enlightenment took place about fifty years after the French Age of Enlightenment . The first enlightened writers were Archduchess Maria Theresa of Austria ( 17171780 ) 's bodyguards ( Gyrgy Bessenyei , Jnos Batsnyi and others ) . The greatest poets of the time were Mihly Csokonai Vitz and Dniel Berzsenyi .
The greatest figure of the language reform was Ferenc Kazinczy . The Hungarian language became feasible for all type of scientific explanations from this time , and furthermore many new words were coined for describing new inventions .
Hungarian literature has recently gained some renown outside the borders of Hungary ( mostly through translations into German , French and English ) . Some modern Hungarian authors have become increasingly popular in Germany and Italy especially Sndor Mrai , Pter Esterhzy , Pter Ndas and Imre Kertsz . The latter is a contemporary Jewish writer who survived the Holocaust and won the Nobel Prize for literature in 2002.
The older classics of Hungarian literature and Hungarian poetry have remained almost totally unknown outside Hungary . Jnos Arany , a famous 19th-century Hungarian poet , is still much loved in Hungary ( especially his collection of Ballads ) , among several other `` true classics '' like Sndor Petfi , the poet of the Revolution of 1848 , Endre Ady , Mihly Babits , Dezs Kosztolnyi , Attila Jzsef , Mikls Radnti and Jnos Pilinszky . Other well-known Hungarian authors are Lszl Krasznahorkai , Ferenc Mra , Gza Grdonyi , Zsigmond Mricz , Gyula Illys , Albert Wass , Mikls Szentkuthy , Magda Szab and Stephen Vizinczey .
=== Cuisine ===
Traditional dishes such as the world-famous Goulash ( gulys stew or gulys soup ) feature prominently in Hungarian cuisine . Dishes are often flavoured with paprika ( ground red peppers ) , a Hungarian innovation . The paprika powder , obtained from a special type of pepper , is one of the most common spices used in typical Hungarian cuisine . Thick , heavy Hungarian sour cream called tejfl is often used to soften the dishes ' flavour . The famous Hungarian hot river fish soup called Fisherman 's soup or [ is usually a rich mixture of several kinds of poached fish .
Other dishes are chicken paprikash , foie gras ] made of goose liver , [ [ prklt stew , vadas , ( game stew with vegetable gravy and Sptzle ) , trout with almonds and salty and sweet dumplings , like trs csusza , ( dumplings with fresh quark ( cheese ) cheese and thick sour cream ) . Desserts include the iconic Dobos Cake , strudels ( rtes ) , filled with apple , cherry , poppy seed or cheese , palacsinta , plum dumplings ( Kle ) , somli dumplings , dessert soups like chilled sour cherry soup and sweet chestnut puree , gesztenyepr ( cooked chestnuts mashed with sugar and rum and split into crumbs , topped with whipped cream ) . Pretzel and kifli are widely popular pastries .
The csrda is the most distinctive type of Hungarian inn , an old-style tavern offering traditional cuisine and beverages . Boroz usually denotes a cosy old-fashioned wine tavern , pince is a beer or wine cellar and a srz is a pub offering draught beer and sometimes meals . The bisztr is an inexpensive restaurant often with self-service . The bf is the cheapest place , although one may have to eat standing at a counter . Pastries , cakes and coffee are served at the confectionery called cukrszda , while an eszpressz is a caf .
Plinka is a fruit brandy , distilled from fruit grown in the orchards situated on the Great Hungarian Plain . It is a spirit native to Hungary and comes in a variety of flavours including apricot ( barack ) and cherry ( cseresznye ) . However , plum ( szilva ) is the most popular flavour . Beer goes well with many traditional Hungarian dishes . The five main Hungarian beer brands are : Borsod Brewery , Soproni , Arany szok , Kbnyai , and Dreher Brewery . In Hungary , people traditionally do not clink their glasses or mugs when drinking beer . There is an urban legend in Hungarian culture that Austrian generals clinked their beer glasses to celebrate the execution of the 13 Martyrs of Arad in 1849 . Many people still follow the tradition , although younger people often disavow it , citing that the vow was only meant to last 150 years .
Wine : As Hugh Johnson ( wine ) says in The History of Wine , the territory of Hungary is ideal for wine-making and the country can be divided to six wine regions : North-Transdanubia , Lake Balaton , South-Pannnia , Duna-region or Alfld , Upper-Hungary and Tokaj-Hegyalja . The Romans brought vines to Pannonia , and by the 5th century AD , there are records of extensive vineyards in what is now Hungary . The Hungarians brought their wine-making knowledge from the East . According to Ahmad ibn Rustah , the Hungarian tribes were familiar with wine-making long time before the Hungarian conquest of the Carpathian Basin .
Hungarian wine regions offer a great variety of styles : the main products of the country are elegant and full-bodied dry whites with good acidity , although complex sweet whites ( Tokaj ) , elegant ( Eger ) and full-bodied robust reds ( Villny and Szekszrd ) . The main varieties are : Olaszrizling , Hrslevel , Furmint , Pinot gris or Szrkebart , Chardonnay ( whites ) , Kkfrankos ( or Blaufrankisch in German ) , Kadarka , Portugieser , Zweigelt , Cabernet sauvignon , Cabernet franc and Merlot . The most famous wines from Hungary are Tokaji Asz and Egri Bikavr . Tokaji , meaning `` of Tokaj '' , or `` from Tokaj '' in Hungarian , is used to label wines from the wine region of Tokaj-Hegyalja . Tokaji wine has received accolades from numerous great writers and composers including Beethoven , Liszt , Schubert and Goethe ; Joseph Haydn 's favourite wine was a Tokaji . Louis XV and Frederick the Great tried to outdo one another when they entertained guests with Tokaji . Napoleon III , the last Emperor of France , ordered 3040 barrels of Tokaji at the French Royal Court every year . Gustav III , King of Sweden , loved Tokaji . In Russia , customers included Peter the Great and Empress Elizabeth , while Catherine the Great actually established a Russian garrison in the town of Tokaj with the aim of assuring regular wine deliveries to St. Petersburg .
For over 150 years , a blend of forty Hungarian herbs has been used to create the liqueur Unicum . Unicum is a bitter , dark-coloured liqueur that can be drunk as an apritif or after a meal , thus helping the digestion .
=== Recreation ===
Hungary is a land of thermal water . A passion for spa culture and Hungarian history have been connected from the very beginning . Hungarian spas feature ancient Rome , Greek architecture , Architecture of Turkey , and northern country architectural elements .
Because of an advantageous geographical location , good quality thermal water can be found in great quantities on over 80 % of Hungary 's territory . Approximately 1,500 thermal springs can be found in Hungary ( more than 100 just in the Capital area ) . There are approximately 450 public baths in Hungary .
The ancient Rome heralded the first age of spas in Hungary . The remains of their bath complexes are still to be seen in buda . Spa culture was revived during the Turkish Invasion and the thermal springs of Buda were used for the construction of a number of bathhouses , some of which such as ( Kirly Baths , Rudas Baths ) are still functioning .
In the 19th century , the advancement in deep drilling and medical science provided the springboard for a further leap in bathing culture . Grand spas such as Gellrt Baths , Lukcs Baths , Margaret Island , and Szchenyi Medicinal Bath are a reflection of this resurgence in popularity . The Szchenyi Thermal Bath is the largest spa complex in Europe and it was the first thermal bath built in the Pest side of Budapest . This building is a noted example of modern Renaissance style . Located on the Buda side of Budapest , the Gellrt spa is the most famous and luxurious thermal complex of the capital city .
=== Folk art ===
Ugrs ( Jumping dances ) are old style dances dating back to the Middle Ages .
Solo or couple dances accompanied by old style music , shepherd and other solo man 's dances from Transylvania , and marching dances along with remnants of medieval weapon dances belong in this group .
Karikz is a circle dance performed by women only accompanied by singing of folk songs .
Csrds are new style dances developed in the 1819th centuries . Csrds is the Hungarian name for the national dances , with Hungarian embroidered costumes and energetic music . From the men 's intricate bootslapping dances to the ancient women 's circle dances , Csrds demonstrates the infectious exuberance of the Hungarian folk dancing still celebrated in the villages .
Verbunkos is a solo man 's dance evolved from the recruiting performances of the Austria-Hungary Austro-Hungarian army .
The Legnyes is a men 's solo dance done by the ethnic Hungarian people living in the Kalotaszeg region of Transylvania . Although usually danced by young men , it can be also danced by older men . The dance is generally performed freestyle by one dancer at a time in front of a band . Women participate in the dance by standing in lines to the side , and singing or shouting verses while the men dance . Each man performs a number of points ( dance phrases ) , typically four to eight without repetition . Each point consists of four parts , each lasting four counts . The first part is usually the same for everyone ( there are only a few variations ) .
It was in the beginning of the 18th-century that the present style of Hungarian folk art took shape , incorporating both Renaissance and Baroque elements , depending on the area , as well as Persian Sassanide influences . Flowers and leaves , sometimes a bird or a spiral ornament , are the principal decorative themes . The most frequent ornament is a flower with a centrepiece resembling the eye of a peacock 's feather .
Nearly all the manifestations of folk art practiced elsewhere in Europe also flourished among the [ people Magyar ] peasantry at one time or another , their ceramics and textile being the most highly developed of all .
The finest achievements in their textile arts are the embroideries which vary from region to region . Those of Kalotaszeg in Transylvania are charming products of Oriental design , sewn chiefly in a single colour ;  red , blue , or black . Soft in line , the embroideries are applied on altar cloths , pillow-cases and sheets .
In Hungary proper , Srkz in Transdanubia and the Mezkvesd in the Great Hungarian Plain produce the finest embroideries . In the Tolna ( county ) region the women 's caps show black and white designs as delicate as lace , and give evidence of the people 's wonderfully subtle artistic feeling . The embroidery motifs applied to women 's wear have also been transposed to tablecloths and runners suitable for modern use as wall decorations .
These vessels , made of black clay , reflect more than three hundred years of traditional Transdanubian folk patterns and shapes . No two are precisely alike , since all work is done by hand , including both the shaping and the decorating . The imprints are made by the thumb or a finger of the ceramist who makes the piece .
=== Porcelain ===
Founded in 1826 , Herend Porcelain is one of the world 's largest ceramic factories , specialising in luxury hand painted and gilded porcelain . In the mid-19th century it was purveyor to the Habsburg Dynasty and aristocratic customers throughout Europe . Many of its classic patterns are still in production . After the fall of communism in Hungary , the factory was privatised and is now 75 % owned by its management and workers , exporting to over 60 countries of the world .
Zsolnay Porcelain Manufacture is a Hungarian manufacturer of porcelain , pottery , ceramics , tiles and stoneware . The company introduced the eosin glazing process and pyrogranite ceramics .
The Zsolnay factory was established by Mikls Zsolnay in Pcs , Hungary , to produce stoneware and ceramics in 1853 . In 1863 , his son , Vilmos Zsolnay ( 18281900 ) joined the company and became its manager and director after several years . He led the factory to worldwide recognition by demonstrating its innovative products at world fairs and international exhibitions , including the 1873 World Fair in Vienna , then at the 1878 World Fair in Paris , where Zsolnay received a Grand Prix .
=== Sport ===
Hungary at the Olympics have been successful contenders in the Olympic Games , only ten countries have won more Olympic medals than Hungary , with a total of 498 medals ranking eighth in an all-time Olympic Games medal count . Hungary has the third-highest number of Olympic medals per capita and second-highest number of gold medals per capita in the world . Hungary has historically excelled in Olympic water sports . In water polo the Hungarian team is the Water polo at the Summer Olympics and in List of Olympic medalists in swimming ( men ) are fourth most successful overall , while List of Olympic medalists in swimming ( women ) are eighth most successful overall . They have also seen success in canoeing and kayaking Canoeing and kayaking at the Summer Olympics .
Hungary won its first gold medal in Winter Olympics in 2018 in mens short track speed skating with a team of four : Csaba Burjn , Sndor Liu , Shaoang Liu , Viktor Knoch .
In 2015 the Assembly of the Hungarian Olympic Committee and the General Assembly of Budapest decided to bid for the 2024 Summer Olympics but eventually awarded to Paris . Budapest has also lost several bids to host the games , in 1916 Summer Olympics , 1920 Summer Olympics , 1936 Summer Olympics , 1944 Summer Olympics , and 1960 Summer Olympics to Berlin , Antwerp , London , and Rome , respectively .
Hungary hosted many global sport event in the past , among others the 1997 World Amateur Boxing Championships , 2000 World Fencing Championships , 2001 World Allround Speed Skating Championships , 2008 World Interuniversity Games , 2008 World Modern Pentathlon Championships , 2010 ITU World Championship Series , 2011 IIHF World Championship , 2013 World Fencing Championships , 2013 World Wrestling Championships , 2014 World Masters Athletics Championships , 2017 World Aquatics Championships and 2017 World Judo Championships , only in the last two decade . Besides these , Hungary was the home of many European-level tournaments , like 2006 European Aquatics Championships , 2010 European Aquatics Championships , 2013 European Judo Championships , 2013 European Karate Championships , 2017 European Rhythmic Gymnastics Championships and will be the host of 4 matches in the UEFA Euro 2020 , which will be held in the 67,889-seat new Multi-purpose stadium multi-purpose New Pusks Ferenc Stadium .
The Hungarian Grand Prix in Formula One has been held at the Hungaroring just outside Budapest , which circuit has FIA Grade 1 license . Since 1986 , the race has been a round of the FIA Formula One World Championship . At the 2013 Hungarian Grand Prix , it was confirmed that Hungary will continue to host a Formula 1 race until 2021 . The track was completely resurfaced for the first time in early 2016 , and it was announced the Grand Prix 's deal was extended for a further five years , until 2026.
Chess is also a popular and successful sport in Hungary , the Hungarian players are the 10th most powerful overall on the ranking of World Chess Federation . There are about 54 Grandmaster ( chess ) and 118 International Masters in Hungary , which is more than in France or United Kingdom . World top junior player is the Hungarian Richrd Rapport currently on the FIDE World Rankings , while Judit Polgr generally considered the Glossary of chess # Strength female chess player of all time . Some of the world 's best Sabre ( fencing ) athletes have historically also hailed from Hungary , and in 2009 , the Hungary men 's national ice hockey team qualified for their first IIHF World Championships , in 2015 , they qualified for their second World Championship in the top division .
==== Football ====
Hungary has won three Olympic football titles , finished runners-up in the 1938 FIFA World Cup and 1954 FIFA World Cups , and third in 1964 European Nations ' Cup . Hungary revolutionised the sport in the 1950s , laying the tactical fundamentals of total football and dominating international football with the Magical Magyars ( `` Golden Team '' ) , which included Ferenc Pusks , top goalscorer of the 20th century , to whom FIFA dedicated its newest award , the FIFA Ferenc Pusks Award . The side of that era has the second World Football Elo Ratings # All-time highest ratings all-time highest Football Elo Ranking in the world , with 2166 , and one of the longest undefeated runs in football history , remaining unbeaten in 31 games spanning more than four years .
The post-golden age decades saw a gradually weakening Hungary , though recently there is renewal in all aspects . The Hungarian Children 's Football Federation was founded in 2008 , as youth development thrives . For the first time in Hungarian football 's history , they hosted the 2010 UEFA Futsal Championship in Budapest and Debrecen , the first time the Hungarian Football Federation staged a UEFA finals tournament . Also , the national teams have produced some surprise successes such as beating Euro 2004 winner Greece national football team 32 and 2006 FIFA World Cup winner Italy national football team 31 . During UEFA Euro 2016 Hungary won UEFA Euro 2016 Group F and were eventually defeated in the round of 16.
== See also ==
* Outline of Hungary
* Index of Hungary-related articles
== Notes ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Kontler , Lszl : Millennium in Central Europe : A History of Hungary , Atlantisz Knyvkiad , Budapest , 1999 ( East-European Non-Fiction ) ,
== External links ==
; Government
* Official site of the Hungarian Government
* Official site of the Hungarian Prime Minister
* Official site of the President of Hungary
* Official Hungarian Tourism website
; General information
* `` Hungary '' in the Encyclopdia Britannica
* Hungary from the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
* Hungary at the European Union
*
* Forecasts for Hungary from International Futures
* Hungary from the BBC News
* Hungary . The World Factbook '' . Central Intelligence Agency .
* Statistical Profile of Hungary at the Association of Religion Data Archives
*
* FAO Country Profiles : Hungary
* Daily News Hungary
* Hungary Today  The latest news about Hungary
Category : Hungary
Category:896 establishments
Category : Central European countries
Category : Countries in Europe
Category : Hungarian-speaking countries and territories
Category : Landlocked countries
Category : Member states of NATO
Category : Member states of the Council of Europe
Category : Member states of the European Union
Category : Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean
Category : Member states of the United Nations
Category : Republics
Category : States and territories established in 1000
Category : States and territories established in 1920
Category : States and territories established in the 890s
Category : Christian states <article_end> <article_start>  
Japan (  , Nippon or Nihon ) is an island country in East Asia , located in the northwest Pacific Ocean . It is bordered on the west by the Sea of Japan , and extends from the Sea of Okhotsk in the north toward the East China Sea and Taiwan in the south . Part of the Ring of Fire , Japan spans Japanese archipelago of List of islands of Japan covering ; the five main islands are Hokkaido , Honshu , Shikoku , Kyushu , and Okinawa Island . Tokyo is Japan 's capital and largest city ; other major cities include Yokohama , Osaka , Nagoya , Sapporo , Fukuoka , Kobe , and Kyoto .
Japan is the List of countries and dependencies by population eleventh-most populous country in the world , as well as one of the List of countries and dependencies by population density and Urbanization by country . About three-fourths of the Geography of Japan country 's terrain is mountainous , concentrating its population of 125.57 million on narrow coastal plains . Japan is divided into Prefectures of Japan and List of regions of Japan . The Greater Tokyo Area is the List of largest cities in the world , with more than 37.4 million residents .
Japan Japanese Paleolithic since the Upper Paleolithic period ( 30,000 BC ) , though the first mentions of the archipelago appear in Book of Han from the 1st century AD . Between the 4th and 9th centuries , the kingdoms of Japan became unified under an Emperor of Japan and his Imperial House of Japan based in Heian-ky . Beginning in the 12th century , political power was held by a series of military dictators ( Shogun ) and feudal lords ( Daimyo ) , and enforced by a class of warrior nobility ( samurai ) . After a Sengoku period century-long period of civil war , the country was reunified in 1603 under the Tokugawa shogunate , which enacted an Sakoku . In 1854 , a Perry Expedition forced Japan to Bakumatsu , which led to Boshin War and the Meiji Restoration in 1868 . In the Meiji ( era ) , the Empire of Japan adopted a Meiji Constitution Western-styled constitution and pursued a program of Industrialisation and Modernization theory . In 1937 , Japan Second Sino-Japanese War ; in 1941 , it entered World War II as an Axis powers . After suffering defeat in the Pacific War and Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki , Japan Surrender of Japan in 1945 and came under a seven-year Occupation of Japan , during which it adopted a Constitution of Japan . Since 1947 , Japan has maintained a Unitary state Parliamentary system constitutional monarchy with a Bicameralism legislature , the National Diet .
Japan is a great power and a member of numerous international organizations , including the United Nations ( since 1956 ) , the OECD , and the Group of Seven . Although it has Article 9 of the Japanese Constitution , the country maintains Japan Self-Defense Forces Self-Defense Forces that are ranked as the world 's Military # Capability development fourth-most powerful military . After World War II , Japan experienced Japanese economic miracle , becoming the List of countries by largest historical GDP second-largest economy in the world by 1990 before being surpassed by China in 2010 . Despite Economic stagnation since the Lost Decade ( Japan ) , the Economy of Japan country 's economy remains the List of countries by GDP ( nominal ) third-largest by nominal GDP and the List of countries by GDP ( PPP ) fourth-largest by PPP . A leader in the Automotive industry in Japan and Electronics industry in Japan , Japan has made significant contributions to Science and technology in Japan . Ranked the List of countries in Asia and Oceania by Human Development Index second-highest country on the Human Development Index in Asia after Singapore , Japan has the world 's List of countries by life expectancy second-highest life expectancy , though it is experiencing a Aging of Japan . The culture of Japan is well-known around the world , including its Japanese art , Japanese cuisine , Music of Japan , and Japanese popular culture , which encompasses prominent Anime and Video games in Japan industries .
== Etymology ==
The name for Japan in Japanese language is written using the kanji and pronounced Nippon or Nihon . Before it was adopted in the early 8th century , the country was known in China as Wa ( Japan ) ( ) and in Japan by the endonym Yamato . Nippon , the original Sino-Japanese reading of the characters , is favored for official uses , including on Japanese yen and postage stamps . Nihon is typically used in everyday speech and reflects shifts in Japanese phonology during the Edo period . The characters mean `` sun origin '' . It is the source of the popular Western epithet `` Land of the Rising Sun '' .
The name Japan is based on the Chinese pronunciation and was introduced to European languages through early trade . In the 13th century , Marco Polo recorded the early Mandarin Chinese or Wu Chinese pronunciation of the characters  labels=no as Cipangu . The old Malay language name for Japan , Japang or Japun , was borrowed from a southern coastal Chinese dialect and encountered by Portuguese Empire traders in Southeast Asia , who brought the word to Europe in the early 16th century . The first version of the name in English appears in a book published in 1577 , which spelled the name as Giapan in a translation of a 1565 Portuguese letter .
== History ==
=== Prehistoric to classical history ===
A Japanese Paleolithic from around 30,000 ; BC constitutes the first known habitation of the Japanese archipelago . This was followed from around 14,500 ; BC ( the start of the Jmon period ) by a Mesolithic to Neolithic semi-sedentary [ culture characterized by Pit-house pit dwelling ] and rudimentary agriculture . [ [ Jmon pottery from the period are among the oldest surviving examples of pottery . From around 1000 BC , Yayoi period # Origin of the Yayoi people began to enter the archipelago from Kyushu , intermingling with the Jomon people ; the Yayoi period saw the introduction of practices including Paddy field wet-rice farming , a new Yayoi pottery , and metallurgy from China and Korea . According to legend , Emperor Jimmu ( grandson of Amaterasu ) founded Yamatai in central Japan in 660 BC , beginning a Imperial House of Japan .
Japan first appears in written history in the Chinese Book of Han , completed in 111 AD . Buddhism was introduced to Japan from Baekje ( a Korean kingdom ) in 552 , but the development of Buddhism in Japan was primarily influenced by China . Despite early resistance , Buddhism was promoted by the ruling class , including figures like Prince Shtoku , and gained widespread acceptance beginning in the Asuka period ( 592710 ) .
The far-reaching Taika Reforms in 645 nationalized all land in Japan , to be Equal-field system among cultivators , and ordered the compilation of a household registry as the basis for a new system of taxation . The Jinshin War of 672 , a bloody conflict between Prince ama and his nephew Prince tomo , became a major catalyst for further administrative reforms . These reforms culminated with the promulgation of the Taih Code , which consolidated existing statutes and established the structure of the central and subordinate local governments . These legal reforms created the ritsury state , a system of Chinese-style centralized government that remained in place for half a millennium .
The Nara period ( 710784 ) marked the emergence of a Japanese state centered on the Imperial Court in Heij Palace Heij-ky ( modern Nara , Nara ) . The period is characterized by the appearance of a nascent Japanese literature with the completion of the Kojiki ( 712 ) and Nihon Shoki ( 720 ) , as well as the development of Buddhist-inspired artwork and Historic Monuments of Ancient Nara . A 735737 Japanese smallpox epidemic smallpox epidemic in 735737 is believed to have killed as much as one-third of Japan 's population . In 784 , Emperor Kanmu moved the capital , settling on Heian-ky ( modern Kyoto ) in 794 . This marked the beginning of the Heian period ( 7941185 ) , during which a distinctly indigenous Japanese culture emerged . Murasaki Shikibu 's The Tale of Genji and the lyrics of Japan 's national anthem `` Kimigayo '' were written during this time .
=== Feudal era ===
Japan 's feudal era was characterized by the emergence and dominance of a ruling class of warriors , the samurai . In 1185 , following the defeat of the Taira clan in the Genpei War , samurai Minamoto no Yoritomo established a military government at Kamakura , Kanagawa . After Yoritomo 's death , the Hj clan came to power as regents for the shguns . The Zen school of Buddhism was introduced from China in the Kamakura period ( 11851333 ) and became popular among the samurai class . The Kamakura shogunate repelled Mongol invasions of Japan in 1274 and 1281 but was eventually Kenmu Restoration by Emperor Go-Daigo . Go-Daigo was defeated by Ashikaga Takauji in 1336 , beginning the Muromachi period ( 13361573 ) . The succeeding Ashikaga shogunate failed to control the feudal warlords ( daimys ) and a nin War , opening the century-long Sengoku period ( `` Warring States '' ) .
During the 16th century , Portuguese traders and Society of Jesus Missionary reached Japan for the first time , initiating direct Nanban trade and Nanban art exchange between Japan and the West . Oda Nobunaga used European technology and firearms to conquer many other daimys ; his consolidation of power began what was known as the AzuchiMomoyama period . After Honn-ji Incident in 1582 , his successor Toyotomi Hideyoshi unified the nation in the early 1590s and launched Japanese invasions of Korea ( 159298 ) .
Tokugawa Ieyasu served as Council of Five Elders for Hideyoshi 's son Toyotomi Hideyori and used his position to gain political and military support . When open war broke out , Ieyasu defeated rival clans in the Battle of Sekigahara in 1600 . He was appointed shgun by Emperor Go-Yzei in 1603 and established the Tokugawa shogunate at Edo ( modern Tokyo ) . The shogunate enacted measures including buke shohatto , as a code of conduct to control the autonomous daimys , and in 1639 the isolationist sakoku ( `` closed country '' ) policy that spanned the two and a half centuries of tenuous political unity known as the Edo period ( 16031868 ) . Modern Japan 's economic growth began in this period , resulting in Kaid and water transportation routes , as well as financial instruments such as futures contracts , banking and insurance of the Osaka rice brokers . The study of Western sciences ( rangaku ) continued through contact with the Dutch enclave in Nagasaki . The Edo period gave rise to kokugaku ( `` national studies '' ) , the study of Japan by the Japanese .
=== Modern era ===
In 1854 , Matthew C. Perry and the `` Black Ships '' of the United States Navy forced the opening of Japan to the outside world with the Convention of Kanagawa . Subsequent similar treaties with other Western countries brought economic and political crises . The resignation of the shgun led to the Boshin War and the establishment of a Abolition of the han system nominally unified under the emperor ( the Meiji Restoration ) . Adopting Western political , judicial , and military institutions , the Cabinet of Japan organized the Privy Council ( Japan ) , introduced the Meiji Constitution , and assembled the National Diet . During the Meiji era ( 18681912 ) , the Empire of Japan emerged as the most developed nation in Asia and as an industrialized world power that pursued military conflict to expand its sphere of influence . After victories in the First Sino-Japanese War ( 18941895 ) and the Russo-Japanese War ( 19041905 ) , Japan gained control of Taiwan , Korea and the southern half of Sakhalin . The Japanese population doubled from 35 million in 1873 to 70 million by 1935 , with a significant shift to urbanization .
The early 20th century saw a period of Taish period ( 19121926 ) overshadowed by increasing expansionism and Japanese militarism . Japan during World War I allowed Japan , which joined the side of the victorious Allies of World War I , to capture German colonial empire in the Pacific and in China . The 1920s saw a political shift towards Statism in Shwa Japan , a period of lawlessness following the 1923 Great Tokyo Earthquake , the passing of Peace Preservation Law # Public Security Preservation Law of 1925 , and a series of May 15 Incident . This process accelerated during the 1930s , spawning a number of radical nationalist groups that shared a hostility to liberal democracy and a dedication to expansion in Asia . In 1931 , Japan Japanese invasion of Manchuria ; following Lytton Report , it resigned from the League of Nations two years later . In 1936 , Japan signed the Anti-Comintern Pact with Nazi Germany ; the 1940 Tripartite Pact made it one of the Axis Powers .
The Empire of Japan invaded other parts of China in 1937 , precipitating the Second Sino-Japanese War ( 19371945 ) . In 1940 , the Empire Japanese invasion of French Indochina , after which the United States placed an oil embargo on Japan . On December 78 , 1941 , Japanese forces carried out surprise Attack on Pearl Harbor , as well as on United Kingdom forces in Battle of Malaya , Bombing of Singapore ( 1941 ) , and Battle of Hong Kong , among others , beginning Pacific War . Throughout areas occupied by Japan during the war , numerous abuses were committed against local inhabitants , with many forced into Comfort women . After Allies of World War II victories during the next four years , which culminated in the Soviet invasion of Manchuria and the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in 1945 , Japan agreed to an Surrender of Japan . The war cost Japan Japanese colonial empire and millions of lives . The Allies ( led by the United States ) repatriated millions of Japanese diaspora from their former colonies and military camps throughout Asia , largely eliminating the Japanese empire and its influence over the territories it conquered . The Allies convened the International Military Tribunal for the Far East to prosecute Japanese leaders for Japanese war crimes .
In 1947 , Japan adopted a new Constitution of Japan emphasizing liberal democratic practices . The Occupation of Japan ended with the Treaty of San Francisco in 1952 , and Japan was granted membership in the United Nations in 1956 . A Japanese economic miracle propelled Japan to become the second-largest economy in the world ; this ended in the mid-1990s after the popping of an Japanese asset price bubble , beginning the Lost Decade ( Japan ) `` Lost Decade '' . On March 11 , 2011 , Japan suffered one of the 2011 Thoku earthquake and tsunami , triggering the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster . On May 1 , 2019 , after the historic abdication of Emperor Akihito , his son Naruhito became Emperor , beginning the Reiwa era .
== Geography ==
Japan comprises 6852 islands extending along the Pacific coast of Asia . It stretches over northeastsouthwest from the Sea of Okhotsk to the East China Sea . The county 's five main islands , from north to south , are Hokkaido , Honshu , Shikoku , Kyushu and Okinawa Island . The Ryukyu Islands , which include Okinawa , are a chain to the south of Kyushu . The Nanp Islands are south and east of the main islands of Japan . Together they are often known as the Japanese archipelago . , Japan 's territory is . Japan has the sixth longest List of countries by length of coastline in the world at . Because of its far-flung outlying islands , Japan has the sixth largest Exclusive economic zone of Japan in the world , covering .
Because of its mountainous terrain , approximately 67 % of Japan 's land is uninhabitable . The habitable zones , mainly in coastal areas , have extremely high population densities : Japan is one of the List of countries by population density . , approximately 0.5 % of Japan 's total area is land reclamation ( umetatechi ) .
Japan is substantially prone to earthquakes , tsunami and volcanoes because of its location along the Pacific Ring of Fire . It has the List of countries by natural disaster risk as measured in the 2016 World Risk Index . Japan has 111 active volcanoes . Destructive earthquakes , often resulting in tsunami , occur several times each century ; the 1923 Great Kant earthquake killed over 140,000 people . More recent major quakes are the 1995 Great Hanshin earthquake and the 2011 Thoku earthquake and tsunami , which triggered a large tsunami .
=== Climate ===
The climate of Japan is predominantly temperate but varies greatly from north to south . The northernmost region , Hokkaido , has a [ continental climate ] with long , cold winters and very warm to cool summers . Precipitation ( meteorology ) is not heavy , but the islands usually develop deep snowbanks in the winter .
In the Sea of Japan region on Honshu 's west coast , northwest winter winds bring heavy snowfall during winter . In the summer , the region sometimes experiences extremely hot temperatures because of the foehn wind . The Central Highland ( Japan ) has a typical inland humid continental climate , with large temperature differences between summer and winter . The mountains of the Chgoku region and Shikoku regions shelter the Seto Inland Sea from seasonal winds , bringing mild weather year-round .
The Pacific coast features a [ subtropical ] climate that experiences milder winters with occasional snowfall and hot , humid summers because of the southeast seasonal wind . The Ryukyu and Nanp Islands have a subtropics , with warm winters and hot summers . Precipitation is very heavy , especially during the rainy season . The main East Asian rainy season begins in early May in Okinawa , and the rain front gradually moves north . In late summer and early autumn , typhoons often bring heavy rain . According to the Environment Ministry , heavy rainfall and increasing temperatures have caused problems in the agricultural industry and elsewhere . The highest temperature ever measured in Japan , , was recorded on July 23 , 2018 , and repeated on August 17 , 2020.
=== Biodiversity ===
Japan has nine forest Ecoregions in Japan which reflect the climate and geography of the islands . They range from Tropical and subtropical moist broadleaf forests in the Ryky and Bonin Islands , to temperate broadleaf and mixed forests in the mild climate regions of the main islands , to temperate coniferous forests in the cold , winter portions of the northern islands . Japan has over 90,000 species of Wildlife of Japan , including the brown bear , the Japanese macaque , the Japanese raccoon dog , the small Japanese field mouse , and the Japanese giant salamander .
A large network of List of national parks of Japan has been established to protect important areas of flora and fauna as well as 52 Ramsar sites in Japan . World Heritage Sites in Japan have been inscribed on the UNESCO World Heritage List for their outstanding natural value .
=== Environment ===
In the period of rapid economic growth after World War II , environmental policies were downplayed by the government and industrial corporations ; as a result , Four Big Pollution Diseases of Japan was widespread in the 1950s and 1960s . Responding to rising concern , the government introduced environmental protection laws in 1970 . The 1973 oil crisis also encouraged the efficient use of energy because of Japan 's lack of natural resources .
, more than 22 coal-fired power plants are planned for construction in Japan , following the switching-off of Nuclear power in Japan Japan 's nuclear fleet after the 2011 Fukushima nuclear disaster . Japan ranks 20th in the 2018 Environmental Performance Index , which measures a nation 's commitment to environmental sustainability . Japan is the world 's fifth largest emitter of carbon dioxide . As the host and signatory of the 1997 Kyoto Protocol , Japan is under treaty obligation to reduce its carbon dioxide emissions and to take other steps to curb climate change . In 2020 the government of Japan announced a target of carbon neutrality carbon-neutrality by 2050 . Environmental issues include urban air pollution ( NOx , suspended particulate matter , and toxics ) , waste management , water eutrophication , nature conservation , Climate change in Japan , chemical management and international co-operation for conservation .
== Politics ==
Japan is a unitary state and constitutional monarchy in which the power of the Emperor of Japan is limited to a ceremonial role . Executive power is instead wielded by the Prime Minister of Japan and his Cabinet of Japan , whose sovereignty is vested in the Japanese people . Naruhito is the Emperor of Japan , having succeeded his father Akihito upon his accession to the Chrysanthemum Throne in 2019.
Japan 's legislative organ is the National Diet , a Bicameralism parliament . It consists of a lower House of Representatives ( Japan ) with 465 seats , elected by popular vote every four years or when dissolved , and an upper House of Councillors ( Japan ) with 245 seats , whose popularly-elected members serve six-year terms . There is universal suffrage for adults over 18 years of age , with a secret ballot for all elected offices . The prime minister as the [ of government ] has the power to appoint and dismiss Ministers of State , and is Imperial Investiture by the emperor after being designated from among the members of the Diet . Elected in the 2020 Liberal Democratic Party ( Japan ) leadership election , Yoshihide Suga is Japan 's prime minister .
Historically influenced by Chinese law , the Law of Japan developed independently during the Edo period through texts such as Kujikata Osadamegaki . Since the late 19th century , the judicial system of Japan has been largely based on the civil law ( legal system ) of Europe , notably Germany . In 1896 , Japan established a civil code based on the German Brgerliches Gesetzbuch , which remains in effect with postWorld War II modifications . The Constitution of Japan , adopted in 1947 , is the oldest unamended constitution in the world . Statutory law originates in the legislature , and the constitution requires that the emperor promulgate legislation passed by the Diet without giving him the power to oppose legislation . The main body of Japanese statutory law is called the Six Codes . Japan 's court system is divided into four basic tiers : the Supreme Court of Japan and three levels of lower courts .
=== Administrative divisions ===
Japan is divided into Prefectures of Japan , each overseen by an elected Governor ( Japan ) and legislature . In the following table , the prefectures are grouped by List of regions of Japan :
=== Foreign relations ===
A member state of the United Nations since 1956 , Japan is one of the G4 nations seeking reform of the United Nations Security Council . Japan is a member of the Group of Seven , Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation , and `` ASEAN Free Trade Area # ASEAN Plus Three '' , and is a participant in the East Asia Summit . It is the world 's fifth largest donor of official development assistance , donating US $ 9.2 billion in 2014 . In 2017 , Japan had the fifth largest diplomatic network in the world .
Japan has close economic and military relations with the United States , with which it maintains a Treaty of Mutual Cooperation and Security between the United States and Japan . The United States is a major market for Japanese exports and a major source of Japanese imports , and is committed to defending the country , with military bases in Japan . Japan signed a security pact with Australia in March 2007 and with India in October 2008.
Japan 's relationship with South Korea had historically been strained because of Japan 's treatment of Koreans during Korea under Japanese rule , particularly over the issue of comfort women . In 2015 , Japan agreed to settle the comfort women dispute with South Korea by issuing a formal apology and paying money to the surviving comfort women . Japan is a major importer of Korean music ( K-pop ) , television ( Korean drama K-dramas ) , and other cultural products .
Japan is engaged in several territorial disputes with its neighbors . Japan contests Russia 's control of the Kuril Islands dispute , which were occupied by the Soviet Union in 1945 . South Korea 's control of the Liancourt Rocks is acknowledged but not accepted as they are claimed by Japan . Japan has strained relations with China and Taiwan over the Senkaku Islands and the status of Okinotorishima .
=== Military ===
Japan is the second-highest-ranked Asian country in the Global Peace Index 2020 . Japan maintains one of the largest military budgets of any country in the world . The country 's military ( the Japan Self-Defense Forces ) is restricted by Article 9 of the Japanese Constitution , which renounces Japan 's right to declare war or use military force in international disputes . The military is governed by the Ministry of Defense ( Japan ) , and primarily consists of the Japan Ground Self-Defense Force , the Japan Maritime Self-Defense Force , and the Japan Air Self-Defense Force . The Japanese Iraq Reconstruction and Support Group and Afghanistan marked the first overseas use of Japan 's military since World War II .
The Government of Japan has been making changes to its security policy which include the establishment of the National Security Council ( Japan ) , the adoption of the National Security Strategy , and the development of the National Defense Program Guidelines . In May 2014 , Prime Minister Shinz Abe said Japan wanted to shed the passiveness it has maintained since the end of World War II and take more responsibility for regional security . Recent tensions , particularly with North Korea and China , have reignited the debate over the status of the JSDF and its relation to Japanese society .
=== Domestic law enforcement ===
Domestic security in Japan is provided mainly by the prefectural police departments , under the oversight of the National Police Agency ( Japan ) . As the central coordinating body for the Prefectural Police Departments , the National Police Agency is administered by the National Public Safety Commission ( Japan ) . The Special Assault Team comprises national-level counter-terrorism tactical units that cooperate with territorial-level Riot Police Unit # Specialist squads Anti-Firearms Squads and Counter-NBC Terrorism Squads . The Japan Coast Guard guards territorial waters surrounding Japan and uses surveillance and control countermeasures against smuggling , marine environmental crime , poaching , piracy , spy ships , unauthorized foreign fishing vessels , and illegal immigration .
The Firearm and Sword Possession Control Law strictly regulates the civilian ownership of guns , swords and other weaponry . According to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime , among the member states of the UN that report statistics , the incidence rates of violent crimes such as murder , abduction , sexual violence and robbery are very low in Japan .
== Economy ==
Japan is the third largest national economy in the world , after the United States and China , in terms of nominal GDP , and the fourth largest national economy in the world , after the United States , China and India , in terms of purchasing power parity . , Japan 's Government debt was estimated at around 230 percent of its annual gross domestic product , the largest of any rated nation , and Japan 's labor force consisted of 67 million workers . Japan has a List of countries by unemployment rate of around 2.4 percent . Around 16 percent of the population were below the poverty line in 2017.
Japan 's exports amounted to 18.5 % of GDP in 2018. , Japan 's main export markets were the United States ( 19.8 percent ) and China ( 19.1 percent ) . Its main exports are motor vehicles , iron and steel products , semiconductors and auto parts . Japan 's main import markets were China ( 23.5 percent ) , the United States ( 11 percent ) , and Australia ( 6.3 percent ) . Japan 's main imports are machinery and equipment , fossil fuels , foodstuffs , chemicals , and raw materials for its industries .
Japan ranks 29th of 190 countries in the 2019 ease of doing business index . The Japanese variant of capitalism has many distinct features : keiretsu enterprises are influential , and Permanent employment and seniority-based career advancement are common in the Japanese work environment . Japan has a large cooperative sector , with three of the ten largest cooperatives in the world , including the largest consumer cooperative and the largest agricultural cooperative in the world .
Japan ranks highly for Competition ( companies ) and economic freedom . It is ranked sixth in the Global Competitiveness Report for 20152016 .
=== Agriculture and fishery ===
The Japanese agricultural sector accounts for about 1.2 % of the total country 's GDP . Only 11.5 % of Japan 's land is suitable for cultivation . Because of this lack of arable land , a system of Terrace ( earthworks ) is used to farm in small areas . This results in one of the world 's highest levels of crop yields per unit area , with an agricultural self-sufficiency rate of about 50 % . Japan 's small agricultural sector is highly subsidized and Agricultural Protectionism in Japan . There has been a growing concern about farming as farmers are aging with a difficult time finding successors .
Japan ranked seventh in the world in fishing industry by country and captured 3,167,610 metric tons of fish in 2016 , down from an annual average of 4,000,000 tons over the previous decade . Japan maintains one of the world 's largest fishing fleets and accounts for nearly 15 % of the global catch , prompting critiques that Japan 's fishing is leading to depletion in fish stocks such as tuna . Japan has sparked controversy by supporting commercial whaling in Japan .
=== Industry ===
Japan has a large industrial capacity and is home to some of the `` largest and most technologically advanced producers of motor vehicles , machine tools , steel and nonferrous metals , ships , chemical substances , textiles , and food processing '' . Japan 's industrial sector makes up approximately 27.5 % of its GDP . The country 's manufacturing output is the third highest in the world .
Japan is the third largest automobile producer in the world and is home to Toyota , the world 's largest automobile company . The Japanese shipbuilding industry faces competition from South Korea and China ; a 2020 government initiative identified this sector as a target for increasing exports .
=== Services and tourism ===
Japan 's service sector accounts for about 70 % of its total economic output . Banking , retail , transportation in Japan , and telecommunications are all major industries , with companies such as Toyota , Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group , -Nippon Telegraph and Telephone , ON ( company ) , Softbank , Hitachi , and Itochu listed as among the largest in the world .
Japan attracted 31.9 ; million international tourists in 2019 . For inbound tourism , Japan was World Tourism rankings 11th in the world in 2019 . The 2017 Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Report ranked Japan 4th out of 141 countries , which was the highest in Asia .
=== Science and technology ===
Japan is a leading nation in scientific research , particularly in the natural sciences and engineering . The country ranks twelfth among the most innovative countries in the 2020 Bloomberg Innovation Index . Relative to gross domestic product , Japan 's research and development budget is the List of countries by research and development spending , with 867,000 researchers sharing a 19-trillion-yen research and development budget . The country has produced twenty-two Nobel Prize in either physics , chemistry or medicine , and three Fields Medal .
Japan leads the world in robotics production and use , supplying 55 % of the world 's 2017 total . Japan has the second highest number of researchers in science and technology per capita in the world with 14 per 1000 employees .
The Japanese consumer electronics industry , once considered the strongest in the world , is in a state of decline as competition arises in countries like South Korea and China . However , video gaming in Japan remains a major industry . In 2014 , Japan 's consumer video game market grossed $ 9.6 billion , with $ 5.8 billion coming from mobile gaming .
The Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency is Japan 's national space agency ; it conducts space , planetary , and aviation research , and leads development of rockets and satellites . It is a participant in the International Space Station : the Japanese Experiment Module ( Kib ) was added to the station during Space Shuttle assembly flights in 2008 . The space probe Akatsuki ( spacecraft ) was launched in 2010 and achieved orbit around Venus in 2015 . Japan 's plans in space exploration include building a colonization of the Moon and landing astronauts by 2030 . In 2007 , it launched lunar explorer SELENE ( Selenological and Engineering Explorer ) from Tanegashima Space Center . The largest lunar mission since the Apollo program , its purpose was to gather data on the Moon # Formation moon 's origin and evolution . The explorer entered a lunar orbit on October 4 , 2007 , and was deliberately crashed into the Moon on June 11 , 2009.
== Infrastructure ==
=== Transportation ===
Japan has invested heavily in transportation infrastructure . The country has approximately of roads made up of of city , town and village roads , of prefectural roads , of general national highways and of national Expressways of Japan .
Since privatization in 1987 , List of railway companies in Japan compete in regional and local passenger transportation markets ; major companies include seven Japan Railways Group enterprises , Kintetsu Railway , Seibu Railway and Keio Corporation . The high-speed Shinkansen ( bullet trains ) that connect major cities are known for their safety and punctuality .
There are 175 airports in Japan . The largest domestic airport , Haneda Airport in Tokyo , was World 's busiest airports by passenger traffic Asia 's second-busiest airport in 2019 . The Keihin and Hanshin superport hubs are among the largest in the world , at 7.98 and 5.22 million twenty-foot equivalent unit respectively .
=== Energy ===
, 39 % of energy in Japan was produced from petroleum , 25 % from coal , 23 % from natural gas , 3.5 % from [ and 1.5 % from Nuclear power in Japan nuclear power ] . Nuclear power was down from 11.2 percent in 2010 . By May 2012 all of the country 's nuclear power plants had been taken offline because of ongoing public opposition following the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster in March 2011 , though government officials continued to try to sway public opinion in favor of returning at least some to service . The [ [ Sendai Nuclear Power Plant restarted in 2015 , and since then several other nuclear power plants have been restarted . Japan lacks significant domestic reserves and has a heavy dependence on List of countries by oil imports . The country has therefore aimed to diversify its sources and maintain high levels of energy efficiency .
=== Water supply and sanitation ===
Responsibility for the water and sanitation sector is shared between the Ministry of Health , Labour and Welfare ( Japan ) Ministry of Health , Labour and Welfare , in charge of water supply for domestic use ; the Ministry of Land , Infrastructure , Transport and Tourism ( Japan ) Ministry of Land , Infrastructure , Transport and Tourism , in charge of water resources development as well as sanitation ; the Ministry of the Environment ( Japan ) , in charge of ambient water quality and environmental preservation ; and the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications , in charge of performance benchmarking of utilities . Access to an improved water source is universal in Japan . About 98 % of the population receives piped water supply from public utilities .
== Demographics ==
Japan has a Demography of Japan of 126.3 million , of which 124.8 million are Japanese nationals ( 2019 ) . In 2019 , 92 % of the total Japanese population lived in cities . The capital city Tokyo has a population of 13.8 million ( 2018 ) . It is part of the Greater Tokyo Area , the biggest List of metropolitan areas by population in the world with 38,140,000 people ( 2016 ) .
Japan 's population is 98.1 % ethnic Japanese , with small populations of foreign workers . Primary minority groups include the indigenous Ainu people and Ryukyuan people , as well as social minority groups like the burakumin . Koreans in Japan , Chinese people in Japan , Filipinos in Japan , Brazilians mostly Japanese Brazilian , and Peruvians mostly Japanese Peruvian are among the small minority groups in Japan .
Japan has the second longest overall life expectancy at birth of any country in the world , at 84 years . The Aging of Japan as a result of a postWorld War II baby boom followed by a decrease in birth rates . over 20 percent of the population is over 65 , and this is projected to rise to one in three by 2030 . The changes in demographic structure have created a number of social issues , particularly a decline in workforce population and increase in the cost of social security benefits . A growing number of younger Japanese are not marrying or remain childless . Japan 's population is expected to drop to around 100 million by 2050 . Immigration to Japan and birth incentives are sometimes suggested as a solution to provide younger workers to support the nation 's aging population . On April 1 , 2019 , Japan 's revised immigration law was enacted , protecting the rights of foreign workers to help reduce labor shortages in certain sectors .
=== Religion ===
Japan 's constitution guarantees full religious freedom . Upper estimates suggest that 8496 percent of the Japanese population subscribe to Shinto as its indigenous religion . However , these estimates are based on people Danka system with a temple , rather than the number of true believers . Many Japanese people practice both Shinto and Buddhism ; they can either identify with both religions or describe themselves as non-religious or spiritual . The level of participation in religious ceremonies as a cultural tradition remains high , especially during Japanese festivals and occasions such as the Hatsumde of the Japanese New Year . Taoism and Confucianism from China have also influenced Japanese beliefs and customs .
Christianity was first introduced into Japan by Jesuit missions starting in 1549 . Today , 1 % to 1.5 % of the population are Christianity in Japan . Throughout the latest century , Western customs originally related to Christianity ( including marriage in Japan , Valentine 's Day and Christmas ) have become popular as secular customs among many Japanese .
About 90 % of those practicing Islam in Japan are foreign-born migrants . there were an estimated 105 mosques and 200,000 Muslims in Japan , 43,000 of which were ethnically Japanese . Other minority religions include Hinduism in Japan , Judaism , and Bah Faith in Japan , as well as the animist beliefs of the Ainu .
=== Languages ===
Japanese writing system uses kanji ( Chinese characters ) and two sets of kana ( syllabary based on Cursive script ( East Asia ) and Radical ( Chinese characters ) of kanji ) , as well as the Latin alphabet and Arabic numerals . English instruction was made mandatory in Japanese elementary schools in 2020.
Besides Japanese , the Ryukyuan languages ( Amami language , Kunigami language , Okinawan language , Miyakoan language , Yaeyama language , Yonaguni language ) , part of the Japonic languages , are spoken in the Ryukyu Islands chain . Few children learn these languages , but local governments have sought to increase awareness of the traditional languages . The Ainu language , which is a language isolate , is moribund language , with only a few native speakers remaining .
=== Education ===
Primary schools , secondary schools and universities were Education in the Empire of Japan in 1872 as a result of the Meiji Restoration . Since the 1947 Fundamental Law of Education , compulsory education in Japan comprises Elementary schools in Japan and Secondary education in Japan # Junior high school , which together last for nine years . Almost all children continue their education at a three-year Secondary education in Japan . The two top-ranking universities in Japan are the University of Tokyo and Kyoto University . Starting in April 2016 , various schools began the academic year with elementary school and junior high school integrated into one nine-year compulsory schooling program ; Ministry of Education , Culture , Sports , Science and Technology plans for this approach to be adopted nationwide .
The Programme for International Student Assessment coordinated by the OECD ranks the knowledge and skills of Japanese 15-year-olds as the third best in the world . Japan is one of the top-performing OECD countries in reading literacy , math and sciences with the average student scoring 529 and has one of the world 's highest-educated labor forces among OECD countries . , Japan 's public spending on education amounted to just 3.3 percent of its GDP , below the OECD average of 4.9 percent . In 2017 , the country ranked third for the percentage of 25- to 64-year-olds that have attained tertiary education with 51 percent . Approximately 60 percent of Japanese aged 25 to 34 have some form of tertiary education qualification , and bachelor 's degrees are held by 30.4 percent of Japanese aged 25 to 64 , the second most in the OECD after South Korea .
=== Health ===
Health care is provided by national and local governments . Payment for personal medical services is offered through a universal health insurance system that provides relative equality of access , with fees set by a government committee . People without insurance through employers can participate in a national health insurance program administered by local governments . Since 1973 , all elderly persons have been covered by government-sponsored insurance .
Japan Suicide in Japan has one of the world 's highest suicide rates . Another significant public health issue is smoking in Japan . Japan has the lowest rate of heart disease in the OECD , and the lowest level of dementia in the developed world .
== Culture ==
Contemporary Japanese culture combines influences from Asia , Europe and North America . Traditional Japanese arts include Japanese handicrafts such as Japanese pottery and porcelain , Kimono , Japanese lacquerware , Japanese sword and Japanese traditional dolls ; performances of bunraku , kabuki , noh , Japanese traditional dance , and rakugo ; and other practices , the Japanese tea ceremony , ikebana , Japanese martial arts , Japanese calligraphy , origami , onsen , Geisha and List of Japanese games . Japan has a developed system for the protection and promotion of both tangible and intangible Cultural Properties of Japan and National Treasures of Japan . Twenty-two sites have been inscribed on the UNESCO World Heritage List , eighteen of which are of cultural significance .
=== Art and architecture ===
The history of Japanese painting exhibits synthesis and competition between native Japanese esthetics and imported ideas . The interaction between Japanese and European art has been significant : for example ukiyo-e prints , which began to be exported in the 19th century in the movement known as Japonism , had a significant influence on the development of modern art in the West , most notably on post-Impressionism . Japanese manga developed in the 20th century and have become popular worldwide .
Japanese architecture is a combination between local and other influences . It has traditionally been typified by wooden or mud plaster structures , elevated slightly off the ground , with tiled or thatched roofs . The Ise Grand Shrine have been celebrated as the prototype of Japanese architecture . Minka and many Japanese Buddhist architecture see the use of tatami mats and Shji that break down the distinction between rooms and indoor and outdoor space . Since the 19th century , Japan has incorporated much of Western modern architecture into construction and design . It was not until after World War II that Japanese architects made an impression on the international scene , firstly with the work of architects like Kenz Tange and then with movements like Metabolist Movement .
=== Literature and philosophy ===
The earliest works of Japanese literature include the Kojiki and Nihon Shoki chronicles and the Man'ysh List of Japanese poetry anthologies , all from the 8th century and written in Chinese characters . In the early Heian period , the system of Phonogram ( linguistics ) known as kana ( [ and katakana ] ) was developed . [ [ The Tale of the Bamboo Cutter is considered the oldest extant Japanese narrative . An account of court life is given in The Pillow Book by Sei Shnagon , while The Tale of Genji by Murasaki Shikibu is often described as the world 's first novel .
During the Edo period , the chnin ( `` townspeople '' ) overtook the samurai aristocracy as producers and consumers of literature . The popularity of the works of Saikaku , for example , reveals this change in readership and authorship , while Matsuo Bash revivified the poetic tradition of the Kokinsh with his [ ( haiku ] ) and wrote the poetic travelogue [ [ Oku no Hosomichi . The Meiji era saw the decline of traditional literary forms as Japanese literature integrated Western influences . Natsume Sseki and Mori gai were significant novelists in the early 20th century , followed by Rynosuke Akutagawa , Jun'ichir Tanizaki , Kaf Nagai and , more recently , Haruki Murakami and Kenji Nakagami . Japan has two Nobel Prize in Literature Nobel Prize-winning authors ;  Yasunari Kawabata ( 1968 ) and Kenzabur e ( 1994 ) .
Japanese philosophy has historically been a Information fusion of both foreign , particularly Chinese philosophy and Western philosophy , and uniquely Japanese elements . In its literary forms , Japanese philosophy began about fourteen centuries ago . Confucian ideals remain evident in the Japanese society and the self , and in the organization of the government and the structure of society . Buddhism has profoundly impacted Japanese psychology , metaphysics , and esthetics .
=== Performing arts ===
Japanese music is eclectic and diverse . Many Traditional Japanese musical instruments , such as the Koto ( instrument ) , were introduced in the 9th and 10th centuries . The popular Music of Japan # Folk music , with the guitar-like shamisen , dates from the 16th century . Western classical music , introduced in the late 19th century , forms an integral part of Japanese culture . Taiko # Kumi-daiko Kumi-daiko ( ensemble drumming ) was developed in postwar Japan and became very popular in North America . Popular music in post-war Japan has been heavily influenced by American and European trends , which has led to the evolution of J-pop . Karaoke is a significant cultural activity .
The four traditional theaters from Japan are noh , kygen , kabuki , and bunraku . Noh is one of the oldest continuous theater traditions in the world .
=== Customs and holidays ===
is a Japanese idiom which denotes a form of interpersonal communication through unspoken mutual understanding . is a virtue of the capability of accepting death with composure . Cherry blossoms are a symbol of isagiyosa in the sense of embracing the transience of the world . is a central idea in Japanese culture , meaning to acknowledge one 's own mistake and to pledge improvement . refers to the Japanese belief that mystical powers dwell in words and names .
Officially , Japan has 16 national , government-recognized holidays . Public holidays in Japan are regulated by the of 1948 . Beginning in 2000 , Japan implemented the Happy Monday System , which moved a number of national holidays to Monday in order to obtain a long weekend . The national holidays in Japan are Japanese New Year New Year 's Day on January 1 , Coming of Age Day on the second Monday of January , National Foundation Day on February 11 , The Emperor 's Birthday on February 23 , Vernal Equinox Day on March 20 or 21 , Shwa Day on April 29 , Constitution Memorial Day on May 3 , Greenery Day on May 4 , Children 's Day ( Japan ) Children 's Day on May 5 , Marine Day on the third Monday of July , Mountain Day on August 11 , Respect for the Aged Day on the third Monday of September , September equinox on September 23 or 24 , Health and Sports Day on the second Monday of October , Culture Day on November 3 , and Labor Thanksgiving Day on November 23.
=== Cuisine ===
Japanese cuisine offers a vast array of Japanese regional cuisine that use traditional recipes and local ingredients . Seafood and Japanese rice or Japanese noodles are traditional staples . Japanese curry , since its introduction to Japan from British Raj , is so widely consumed that it can be termed a national dish , alongside ramen and sushi . Traditional Japanese sweets are known as wagashi . Ingredients such as red bean paste and mochi are used . More modern-day tastes includes green tea ice cream .
Popular Japanese beverages include sake , which is a brewed rice beverage that typically contains 1417 % alcohol and is made by multiple fermentation of rice . Beer has been brewed in Japan since the late 17th century . Green tea is produced in Japan and prepared in forms such as matcha , used in the Japanese tea ceremony .
=== Media ===
According to the 2015 NHK survey on television viewing in Japan , 79 percent of Japanese watch television daily . Japanese television dramas are viewed both within Japan and internationally ; other popular shows are in the genres of Japanese variety show , comedy , and news programs . Japanese newspapers are among the most circulated in the world .
Japan has one of the oldest and largest film industries globally . Ishir Honda 's Godzilla ( 1954 film ) became an international icon of Japan and spawned an entire subgenre of kaiju films , as well as the longest-running film franchise in history . Japanese animated films and television series , known as anime , were largely influenced by Japanese manga and have been extensively popular in the West . Japan is a world-renowned powerhouse of animation .
=== Sports ===
Traditionally , sumo is considered Japan 's national sport . Japanese martial arts such as judo and kendo are taught as part of the compulsory junior high school curriculum . Baseball in Japan is the most popular spectator sport in the country . Japan 's top professional league , Nippon Professional Baseball , was established in 1936 . Since the establishment of the J . League in 1992 , association football has gained a wide following . The country co-hosted the 2002 FIFA World Cup with South Korea . Japan has one of the most successful football teams in Asia , winning the AFC Asian Cup four times , and the 2011 FIFA Women 's World Cup FIFA Women 's World Cup in 2011 . Golf is also popular in Japan .
In motorsport , Japanese automotive manufacturers have been successful in multiple different categories , with titles and victories in series such as Formula One , Grand Prix motorcycle racing , IndyCar Series , World Rally Championship , FIA World Endurance Championship , World Touring Car Championship , British Touring Car Championship and the WeatherTech SportsCar Championship . Three Japanese drivers have achieved podium finishes in Formula One , and drivers from Japan have victories at the Indianapolis 500 and the 24 Hours of Le Mans , in addition to success in domestic championships . Super GT is the most popular national series in Japan , while Super Formula Championship is the top level domestic open-wheel series . The country hosts major races such as the Japanese Grand Prix .
Japan hosted the Summer Olympics in 1964 Summer Olympics and the Winter Olympics in 1972 Winter Olympics and 1998 Winter Olympics . The country hosted the official 2006 Basketball World Championship and will co-host the 2023 Basketball World Championship . Tokyo will host the 2020 Summer Olympics , making Tokyo the first Asian city to host the Olympics twice . The country gained the hosting rights for the official Women 's Volleyball World Championship on five occasions , more than any other nation . Japan is the most successful Asian Rugby Union country and hosted the 2019 IRB Rugby World Cup .
== See also ==
* Index of Japan-related articles
* Outline of Japan
== Notes ==
== References ==
== External links ==
Government
* JapanGov ;  The Government of Japan
* Prime Minister of Japan and His Cabinet Official website
* The Imperial Household Agency , official site of the Imperial House of Japan
* National Diet Library
General information
* Japan from University of Colorado Boulder Libraries GovPubs
* Japan profile from BBC News
* Japan from the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
*
* Old maps of Japan , from the Eran Laor Cartographic Collection , The National Library of Israel
Category : Japan
Category : East Asian countries
Category : G7 nations
Category : Group of Eight nations
Category : G20 nations
Category : Island countries
Category : Member states of the United Nations
Category : Northeast Asian countries
Category : Transcontinental countries <article_end> <article_start><article_end> <article_start>  
Grenada ( ; Grenadian Creole French : Gwenad ) is a country in the West Indies in the Caribbean Sea at the southern end of the Grenadines island chain . Grenada consists of the island of Grenada itself , two smaller islands , Carriacou and Petite Martinique , and several small islands which lie to the north of the main island and are a part of the Grenadines . It is located northwest of Trinidad and Tobago , northeast of Venezuela and southwest of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines . Its size is , and it had an estimated population of 112,523 in July 2020 . Its capital is St. George 's , Grenada St. George 's . Grenada is also known as the `` Island of Spice '' due to its production of nutmeg and mace ( spice ) crops .
Before the European colonization of the Americas , Grenada was inhabited by the Indigenous peoples of the Americas Arawaks and later by the Island Caribs . Christopher Columbus sighted Grenada in 1498 during his Voyages of Christopher Columbus to the Americas . Although it was deemed the property of the Monarchy of Spain , there are no records to suggest the Spanish ever landed or settled on the island . Following several unsuccessful attempts by Europeans to colonise the island due to resistance from the Island Caribs , French colonial empire settlement and colonisation began in 1650 and continued for the next century . On 10 February 1763 , Grenada was ceded to the British Empire under the Treaty of Paris ( 1763 ) . British rule continued until 1974 ( except for a Capture of Grenada ( 1779 ) between 1779 and 1783 ) . From 1958 to 1962 Grenada was part of the Federation of the West Indies , a short-lived federation of British West Indies . On 3 March 1967 , it was granted full autonomy over its internal affairs as an associated state .
Independence was granted on 7 February 1974 under the leadership of Eric Gairy , who became the first List of heads of government of Grenada of the sovereign state . The new country became a member of the Commonwealth , with Queen Elizabeth as Head of State . In March 1979 , the MarxismLeninism MarxistLeninist New Jewel Movement overthrew Gairy 's government in a Bloodless coup bloodless coup d'tat and established the People 's Revolutionary Government ( Grenada ) People 's Revolutionary Government ( PRG ) , headed by Maurice Bishop as Prime Minister . Bishop was later arrested and executed by members of the People 's Revolutionary Army , prompting a United States invasion of Grenada U.S.-led invasion in October 1983 . Since then , democratic governance has been restored and the island has remained politically stable .
==Etymology==
The origin of the name `` Grenada '' is obscure , but it is likely that Spanish sailors named the island for the Andalusian city of Granada . It carried at least two other names during the Age of Discovery .
On his Voyages of Christopher Columbus to the region in 1498 , Christopher Columbus sighted Grenada and named it `` La Concepcin '' in honour of the Mary , mother of Jesus . It is said that he may have actually named it `` Assumpcin '' , but it is uncertain , as he is said to have sighted what are now Grenada and Tobago from a distance and named them both at the same time . However , it became accepted that he named Tobago `` Assumpcin '' and Grenada `` La Concepcin '' .
In 1499 , the Italian explorer Amerigo Vespucci traveled through the region with the Spanish explorer Alonso de Ojeda and mapmaker Juan de la Cosa . Vespucci is reported to have renamed the island `` Mayo '' , although this is the only map where the name appears .
However , by the 1520s , Spanish maps used the name `` Granada '' , and referred to the islands to the north as Los Granadillos ( `` Little Granadas '' ) . Although it was deemed the property of the Monarchy of Spain , there are no records to suggest the Spanish ever attempted to settle Grenada .
The French maintained the name ( `` La Grenade '' in French ) after settlement and colonisation in 1649 . On 10 February 1763 , the island of La Grenade was ceded to the British under the Treaty of Paris ( 1763 ) . The British renamed it `` Grenada '' , one of many place-name anglicisations they made there .
==History==
===Pre-Columbian history===
Grenada was first populated by peoples from South America , possibly during the Caribbean Ortoiroid people , although definitive evidence is lacking . The earliest potential human presence comes from Proxy ( statistics ) evidence of lake cores , beginning ~3600 BC . Less ephemeral , permanent villages began around ~AD 300 . The population peaked between AD 750-1250 , with major changes in population afterwards , potentially the result of regional droughts and/or the Island Caribs `` Carib Invasion '' , although the latter rests on highly circumstantial evidence .
===European arrival===
It is thought that Christopher Columbus was the first European to see Grenada in 1498 during his Voyages of Christopher Columbus , naming it 'Concepcin ' . The Spanish did not follow up on this and it was the English who were the first to attempt to colonise the island in 1609 ; however they were driven away by the native Carib peoples .
===French colony ( 16491763 ) ===
In 1649 a French expedition of 203 men from Martinique led by Jacques Dyel du Parquet founded a permanent settlement on Grenada . They signed a peace treaty with the Carib chief Chief Kairouane , but within months conflict broke out between the two communities . This lasted until 1654 when the island was completely subjugated by the French . The indigenous peoples who survived either left for neighbouring islands or retreated to remoter parts of Grenada , where they ultimately disappeared during the 1700s . Warfare continued during the 1600s between the French on Grenada and the Caribs of present-day Dominica and St. Vincent and the Grenadines .
The French named their French colonial empires La Grenade , and the economy was initially based on sugar cane and indigo , worked by African slaves . The French established a capital known as St George 's , Grenada ( later St. George 's ) . To shelter from hurricanes the French navy would often take refuge in the capital 's natural harbour , as no nearby French islands had a natural harbour to compare with that of Fort Royal . The British captured Grenada during the Seven Years ' War in 1762.
===British colonial period===
====Early colonial period====
Grenada was formally ceded to Kingdom of Great Britain by the Treaty of Paris ( 1763 ) in 1763 . The French French capture of Grenada 1779 re-captured the island during the American Revolutionary War , after Comte d'Estaing won the bloody land and naval Battle of Grenada in July 1779 . However the island was restored to Britain with the Peace of Paris ( 1783 ) in 1783 . A decade later dissatisfaction with British rule led to a Fdon Rebellion pro-French revolt in 179596 led by Julien Fdon , which was successfully defeated by the British .
As Grenada 's economy grew , more and more African slaves were forcibly transported to the island . Britain eventually outlawed the slave trade within the British Empire in 1807 , and slavery was outlawed completely in 1834 . In an effort to ameliorate the subsequent labour shortage , migrants from India were brought to Grenada in 1857.
Nutmeg was introduced to Grenada in 1843 when a merchant ship called in on its way to England from the East Indies . The ship had a small quantity of nutmeg trees on board which they left in Grenada , and this was the beginning of Grenada 's nutmeg industry that now supplies nearly 40 % of the world 's annual crop .
====Later colonial period====
In 1877 Grenada was made a Crown colony . Theophilus A. Marryshow founded the Representative Government Association ( RGA ) in 1917 to agitate for a new and participative constitutional dispensation for the Grenadian people . Partly as a result of Marryshow 's lobbying , the Wood Commission of 192122 concluded that Grenada was ready for constitutional reform in the form of a modified Crown colony government . This modification granted Grenadians the right to elect five of the 15 members of the Legislative Council , on a restricted property franchise enabling the wealthiest 4 % of adult Grenadians to vote . Marryshow was named a 1943 Birthday Honours # Commander of the Order of the British Empire ( CBE ) Commander of the Order of the British Empire ( CBE ) in 1943.
In 1950 Eric Gairy founded the Grenada United Labour Party ( GULP ) , initially as a trade union , which led the 1951 general strike for better working conditions . This sparked great unrestso many buildings were set ablaze that the disturbances became known as the `` red sky '' daysand the British authorities decided to call in military reinforcements to help regain control of the situation . On 10 October 1951 , Grenada held its 1951 Grenadian general election on the basis of universal adult suffrage , with Gairy 's party winning six of the eight seats contested .
From 1958 to 1962 Grenada was part of the Federation of the West Indies . After the federation 's collapse Grenada was granted full autonomy over its internal affairs as an Associated State on 3 March 1967 . Herbert Blaize of the Grenada National Party ( GNP ) was the first Premier of the Associated State of Grenada from March to August 1967 . Eric Gairy served as Premier of Grenada # Premier of Associated state of Grenada ( 1967-1974 ) from August 1967 until February 1974.
===Post-independence era===
Independence was granted on 7 February 1974 , under the leadership of Eric Gairy , who became the first Prime Minister of Grenada . Grenada opted to remain within the British Commonwealth , retaining Queen Elizabeth as Monarchy of Grenada , represented locally by a Governor-General of Grenada Governor-General . Civil conflict gradually broke out between Eric Gairy 's government and some opposition parties , including the Marxist New Jewel Movement ( NJM ) . Gairy and the GULP won the 1976 Grenadian general election , albeit with an reduced majority ; however the opposition deemed the results invalid due to fraud and the violent intimidation performed by the so-called 'Mongoose Gang ' , a private militia loyal to Gairy .
On 13 March 1979 , whilst Gairy was out of the country , the NJM launched a bloodless coup which removed Gairy , suspended the constitution , and established a People 's Revolutionary Government ( PRG ) , headed by Maurice Bishop who declared himself Prime Minister . His MarxismLeninism MarxistLeninist government established close ties with Cuba , Nicaragua , and other communist bloc countries . All political parties except for the New Jewel Movement were banned and no elections were held during the four years of PRG rule .
===Invasion by the United States ( 1983 ) ===
====Coup and execution of Maurice Bishop====
Some years later a dispute developed between Bishop and certain high-ranking members of the NJM . Though Bishop cooperated with Cuba and the USSR on various trade and foreign policy issues , he sought to maintain a `` non-aligned '' status . Bishop had been taking his time making Grenada wholly socialist , simultaneously encouraging private-sector development in an attempt to make the island a popular tourist destination . Hardline Marxist party members , including communist Deputy Prime Minister Bernard Coard , deemed Bishop insufficiently revolutionary and demanded that he either step down or enter into a power-sharing arrangement .
On 16 October 1983 Bernard Coard and his wife , Phyllis , backed by the Grenadian Army , led a coup against the government of Maurice Bishop and placed Bishop under [ arrest ] . These actions led to street demonstrations in various parts of the island because Bishop had widespread support from the population . Because Bishop was a widely popular leader , he was freed by impassioned supporters who marched en masse on his guarded residence from a rally in the capital 's central square . Bishop then led the crowd to the island 's military headquarters to reassert his power . Grenadian soldiers were dispatched in armored vehicles by the Coard faction to retake the fort . A confrontation between soldiers and civilians at the fort ended in gunfire and panic . Three soldiers and at least eight civilians died in the tumult that also injured 100 others , a school-sponsored study later found . When the initial shooting ended with Bishop 's surrender , he and seven of his closest supporters were taken prisoner and executed by a firing squad of soldiers . Besides Bishop , the group included three of his cabinet ministers , a trade union leader and three service-industry workers .
After the execution of Bishop , the People 's Revolutionary Army ( Grenada ) People 's Revolutionary Army ( PRA ) formed a military Marxist government with General Hudson Austin as chairman . The army declared a four-day total curfew , during which anyone leaving their home without approval would be shot on sight .
====United States and allied response and reaction====
The overthrow of a moderately socialist government by one which was strongly pro-communist concerned the administration of US President Ronald Reagan . Reagan also claimed that particularly worrying was the presence of Cuban construction workers and military personnel building a Point Salines International Airport on Grenada . Bishop had stated the purpose of the airstrip was to allow commercial jets to land , but some US military analysts argued that the only reason for constructing such a long and reinforced runway was so that it could be used by heavy military transport planes . The contractors , American and European companies , and the European Economic Community , which provided partial funding , all claimed the airstrip did not have military capabilities . Reagan claimed that Cuba , under the direction of the Soviet Union , would use Grenada as a refuelling stop for Cuban and Soviet airplanes loaded with weapons destined for Central American communist insurgents .
On 25 October 1983 , combined forces from the United States and from the Regional Security System ( RSS ) based in Barbados invaded Grenada in an operation codenamed Invasion of Grenada . The US stated this was done at the behest of the governments of Barbados and Dominica and the Governor-General of Grenada , Paul Scoon . Progress was rapid and within four days the Americans had removed the military government of Hudson Austin .
The invasion was heavily criticized by the governments of Britain , Trinidad and Tobago , and Canada . The United Nations General Assembly condemned it as `` a flagrant violation of international law '' by a vote of 108 in favor to 9 , with 27 abstentions . The United Nations Security Council considered a similar resolution , which was supported by 11 nations . However , the United States vetoed the motion .
====Post-invasion arrests====
After the invasion , the pre-revolutionary Grenadian constitution came into operation once again . Eighteen members of the PRG/PRA were arrested on charges related to the murder of Maurice Bishop and seven others . The 18 included the top political leadership of Grenada at the time of the execution , along with the entire military chain of command directly responsible for the operation that led to the executions . Fourteen were Capital punishment , one was found not guilty , and three were sentenced to 45 years in prison . The death sentences were eventually commuted to terms of imprisonment . Those in prison have become known as 'the Grenada 17 ' .
===Grenada since 1983===
When US troops withdrew from Grenada in December 1983 , Nicholas Brathwaite of the National Democratic Congress ( Grenada ) was appointed Prime Minister of an interim administration by Governor-General Scoon until elections could be organised . The first democratic elections since 1976 were 1984 Grenadian general election , and were won by the Grenada National Party under Herbert Blaize , who served as Prime Minister until his death in December 1989.
Ben Jones ( Grenada ) briefly succeeded Blaize as Prime Minister and served until the 1990 Grenadian general election , which was won by the National Democratic Congress under Nicholas Brathwaite who returned as Prime Minister for a second time until he resigned in February 1995 . He was succeeded by George Brizan who served for a brief period until the 1995 Grenadian general election which was won by the New National Party ( Grenada ) under Keith Mitchell , who went on to win the 1999 Grenadian general election and 2003 elections , serving for a record 13 years until 2008 . Mitchell re-established relations with Cuba and also reformed the country 's banking system , which had come in for criticism over potential money laundering concerns .
In 200002 , much of the controversy of the late 1970s and early 1980s was once again brought into the public consciousness with the opening of the truth and reconciliation commission . The commission was chaired by a Holy Orders , Father Mark Haynes , and was tasked with uncovering injustices arising from the PRA , Bishop 's regime , and before . It held a number of hearings around the country . Brother Robert Fanovich , head of Presentation Brothers ' College ( PBC ) in St. George 's tasked some of his senior students with conducting a research project into the era and specifically into the fact that Maurice Bishop 's body was never discovered . Paterson also uncovered that there was still a lot of resentment in Grenadian society resulting from the era and a feeling that there were many injustices still unaddressed .
On 7 September 2004 , after being hurricane-free for 49 years , the island was directly hit by Hurricane Ivan . Ivan struck as a Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale , resulting in 39 deaths and damage or destruction to 90 % of the island 's homes . On 14 July 2005 , Hurricane Emily ( 2005 ) , a Category 1 hurricane at the time , struck the northern part of the island with winds , killing one person and causing an estimated USD $ 110 ; million ( EC $ 297 ; million ) worth of damage . Agriculture , and in particular the nutmeg industry , suffered serious losses , but that event has begun changes in crop management and it is hoped that as new nutmeg trees gradually mature , the industry will gradually rebuild .
Mitchell was defeated in the 2008 Grenadian general election by the NDC under Tillman Thomas , however he won the 2013 Grenadian general election by a landslide and the NNP returned to power , winning again by another landslide 2018 Grenadian general election . In March 2020 , 2020 coronavirus pandemic in Grenada Grenada confirmed its first case of COVID-19 , of which the economic effects are expected to rival past downturns , including Hurricane Ivan .
==Geography==
The island of Grenada is the southernmost island in the Antilles archipelago , bordering the eastern Caribbean Sea and western Atlantic Ocean , and roughly north of both Venezuela and Trinidad and Tobago . Its sister islands make up the southern section of the Grenadines , which include Carriacou , Petite Martinique , Ronde Island , Caille Island , Diamond Island ( Grenadines ) , Large Island , Saline Island , and Frigate Island ( Grenadines ) ; the remaining islands to the north belong to St Vincent and the Grenadines . Most of the population lives on Grenada , and major towns there include the capital , St. George 's , Grenada St. George 's , Grenville , Grenada and Gouyave . The largest settlement on the sister islands is Hillsborough , Grenada on Carriacou .
Grenada is of volcanic origin , as evident in its soil , mountainous interior , and several explosion craters , including Lake Antoine , Grenada , Grand Etang Lake and Levera Pond . Grenada 's highest point is Mount Saint Catherine ( Grenada ) Mount St. Catherine , rising to above sea level . Other major mountains include Mount Granby and South East Mountain . Several small rivers with waterfalls flow into the sea from these mountains . The coastline contains several bays , most notably on the southern coast which is split into numerous thin peninsulas .
Grenada is home to four ecoregions : Windward Islands moist forests , Leeward Islands dry forests , Windward Islands dry forests , and Windward Islands xeric scrub . It had a 2018 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 4.22/10 , ranking it 131st globally out of 172 countries .
===Climate===
The climate is tropical : hot and humid in the dry season and cooled by the moderate rain fall in the wet season . Grenada , being on the southern edge of the [ belt ] , has suffered only three hurricanes in fifty years .
Hurricane Janet passed over Grenada on 23 September 1955 , with winds of , causing severe damage . The most recent storms to hit have been Hurricane Ivan on 7 September 2004 , causing severe damage and thirty-nine deaths , and Hurricane Emily on 14 July 2005 , causing serious damage in Carriacou and in the north of Grenada , which had been relatively lightly affected by Hurricane Ivan .
==Politics==
Grenada is a Commonwealth realm with Queen Elizabeth II as [ of state ] , represented locally by a List of Governors-General of Grenada Governor-General . Executive ( government ) lies with the head of government , the Prime Minister of Grenada . The Governor-General role is largely ceremonial , while the Prime Minister is usually the leader of the largest party in Parliament of Grenada .
The Parliament of Grenada consists of a Senate ( 13 members ) and a House of Representatives ( 15 members ) . Senators are appointed by the government and the opposition , while the Representatives are elected by the population for five-year terms . Grenada operates a multi-party system , with the largest parties being the center-right New National Party ( Grenada ) ( NNP ) and the center-left National Democratic Congress ( Grenada ) ( NDC ) .
===Foreign relations===
Grenada is a full and participating member of both the Caribbean Community ( CARICOM ) and the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States ( OECS ) .
====The Commonwealth====
Grenada is , along with much of the Caribbean region , a member of the Commonwealth of Nations . The organization , which primarily consists of former British colonies , focuses on fostering international relations between its members .
====Organization of American States ( OAS ) ====
Grenada is one of the 35 states which has ratified the Organization of American States charter and is a member of the Organization . Grenada entered into the Inter-American system in 1975 according to the OAS 's website .
====Double Taxation Relief ( CARICOM ) Treaty====
On 6 July 1994 at Lloyd Erskine Sandiford Centre in St. Michael , Barbados , George Brizan signed the Double Taxation Relief ( CARICOM ) Treaty on behalf of the Government of Grenada . This treaty covered concepts such as taxes , residence , tax jurisdictions , capital gains , business profits , interest , dividends , royalties and other areas .
====FATCA====
On 30 June 2014 , Grenada signed a Model 1 agreement with the United States of America in relation to Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act ( FATCA ) .
===Military===
Grenada has no standing military , leaving typical military functions to the Royal Grenada Police Force ( including a Special Service Unit ) and the Coast Guard of Grenada .
In 2019 , Grenada signed the UN treaty on the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons .
===Administrative divisions===
Grenada is divided into Parishes of Grenada : Carriacou and Petite Martinique ( not pictured ) have the status of a dependency .
===Human rights===
Male homosexuality is illegal in Grenada and punishable by prison time .
==Economy==
Grenada has a small economy in which tourism is the major Foreign exchange market earner . Major short-term concerns are the rising Government budget deficit and the deterioration in the external account balance . Grenada shares a common central bank and a common currency ( the East Caribbean dollar ) with seven other members of the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States ( OECS ) .
Grenada has suffered from a heavy external debt problem , with government debt service payments running at about 25 % of total revenues in 2017 ; Grenada was listed as ninth from bottom in a study of 126 developing countries .
===Agriculture and exports===
Grenada is an exporter of several different spices , most notably nutmeg , its top export and depicted on the national flag , and mace ( spice ) . Other major exports include bananas , cocoa , fruit and vegetables , clothing , chocolate and fish .
===Tourism===
Tourism is the mainstay of Grenada 's economy . Conventional beach and water-sports tourism is largely focused in the southwest region around St George , the airport and the coastal strip . Ecotourism is growing in significance . Most small ecofriendly guesthouses are located in the Saint David Parish , Grenada and Saint John Parish , Grenada parishes . The tourism industry is increasing dramatically with the construction of a large cruise ship pier and esplanade .
Tourism is concentrated in the southwest of the island , around St. George 's , Grand Anse , Lance Aux Epines , and Point Salines . Grenada has many beaches around its coastline , including the long Grand Anse Beach in St George , often hailed as one of the best beaches in the world . Grenada 's many waterfalls are also popular with tourists . The nearest to St. George 's is the Annandale Waterfalls , but other notable ones like Mt . Carmel , Concord , Seven Sisters and Tufton Hall also being within easy reach .
Several festivals also draw in tourists , such as Carriacou Maroon and String Band Music Festival in April , the Annual Budget Marine Spice Island Bill Fish Tournament , the Island Water World Sailing Week and the Grenada Sailing Festival Work Boat Regatta .
==Education==
Education in Grenada consists of kindergarten , pre-primary school , primary school , secondary school and tertiary education . The government has prioritised education , spending 10.3 % of its budget to the sector in 2016 , the third highest rate in the world . Literacy rates are very high , with 98.6 % of the population being able to read and write . Schools include :
=== Primary Schools ===
=== Secondary Schools ===
=== Tertiary education ===
==Transport==
Maurice Bishop International Airport is the country 's main airport , connecting the country with other Caribbean islands , the United States , Canada , and Europe . There is also an airport on Carriacou .
==Demographics==
A majority of Grenadians ( 82 % ) are descendants of the Atlantic slave trade . Few of the indigenous Carib and Arawak population survived the French purge at Sauteurs . A small percentage of descendants of indentured workers from India were brought to Grenada between 1857 and 1885 , predominantly from the states of Bihar and Uttar Pradesh . Today , Grenadians of Indian descent constitute 2.2 % of the population . There is also a small community of French and English descendants . The rest of the population is of mixed descent ( 13 % ) .
Grenada , like many of the Caribbean islands , is subject to a large amount of out-migration , with a large number of young people seeking more prospects abroad . Popular migration points for Grenadians include more prosperous islands in the Caribbean ( such as Barbados ) , North American Cities ( such as New York City , Toronto and Montreal ) , the United Kingdom ( in particular , London and Yorkshire ; see Grenadian British ) and Australia .
===Religion===
Figures are 2011 estimates
* Protestant 49.2 % ; includes
* * Pentecostalism 17.2 %
* * Seventh-day Adventist Church 13.2 %
* * Anglicanism 8.5 %
* * Baptists 3.2 %
* * Church of God in Christ 2.4 %
* * Evangelical 1.9 %
* * Methodist 1.6 %
* * other 1.2 %
* Roman Catholicism in Grenada 36 %
* none 5.7 %
* unspecified 1.3 %
* Jehovah 's Witness 1.2 %
* Rastafarianism 1.2 %
* other 5.5 %
===Languages===
English is the country 's official language but the main spoken language is either of two creole languages ( Grenadian Creole English and , less frequently , Grenadian Creole French ) ( sometimes called 'patois ' ) which reflects the African , European , and native heritage of the nation . The creoles contain elements from a variety of African languages , French and English . Grenadian Creole French is mainly spoken in smaller rural areas .
Some Hindi/Bhojpuri terms are still spoken amongst the Indo-Grenadian community descendants .
The indigenous languages were Ieri language and Karina language ( Carib ) .
==Culture==
Island culture is heavily influenced by the Ethnic groups of Africa roots of most of the Grenadians , coupled with the country 's long experience of colonial rule under the British . Although French influence on Grenadian culture is much less visible than on some other Caribbean islands , surnames and place names in French remain , and the everyday language is laced with French words and the local Creole , or Patois . Stronger French influence is found in the well seasoned Spice and styles of cooking similar to those found in New Orleans , and some French architecture has survived from the 1700s . Indian and Island Caribs influence is also seen , especially in the island 's cuisine .
Oil down , a stew , is considered to be the national dish . The name refers to a dish cooked in coconut milk until all the milk is absorbed , leaving a bit of coconut oil in the bottom of the pot . Early recipes call for a mixture of salted pigtail , pig 's feet ( trotters ) , salt beef and chicken , dumplings made from flour , and provision like breadfruit , green banana , yam and potatoes . Callaloo leaves are sometimes used to retain the steam and add extra flavour .
Soca music , Calypso music , and reggae are popular music genres and are played at Grenada 's annual Carnival . Over the years rap music became popular amongst Grenadian youths , and there have been numerous young rappers emerging in the island 's underground rap scene . Zouk ( musical movement ) is also being slowly introduced onto the island .
An important aspect of the Grenadian culture is the tradition of Storytelling , with Folklores bearing both African and French influences . The character , Anansi , a spider who is a trickster , originated in West Africa and is prevalent on other islands as well . French influence can be seen in La Diablesse , a well-dressed she-devil , and Loogaroo ( from `` loup-garou '' ) , a werewolf .
==Sports==
===Olympics===
Grenada has competed in every Summer Olympics since the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles . Kirani James won the first Olympic gold medal for Grenada in the Athletics at the 2012 Summer Olympics  Men 's 400 metres men 's 400 meters in 2012 Summer Olympics in London and silver in 2016 Summer Olympics .
===Cricket===
As with other islands from the Caribbean , cricket is the national and most popular sport and is an intrinsic part of Grenadian culture . The Grenada national cricket team forms a part of the Windward Islands cricket team in regional domestic cricket , however it plays as a separate entity in minor regional matches , as well as having previously played Twenty20 cricket in the Stanford 20/20 .
The Grenada National Cricket Stadium in St. George 's , Grenada St. George 's hosts domestic and international cricket matches . Devon Smith , West Indies record holder to win the List-A cricket List-A West Indian WICB Cup for the second time , was born in the small town of Hermitage ( Carriacou ) .
In April 2007 Grenada jointly hosted ( along with several other Caribbean nations ) the 2007 Cricket World Cup . The Island 's Prime Minister was the CARICOM representative on cricket and was instrumental in having the World Cup games brought to the region . After Hurricane Ivan , the government of the People 's Republic of China ( PRC ) paid for the new $ 40 ; million Queen 's Park , Grenada and provided the aid of over 300 labourers to build and repair it . During the opening ceremony , the anthem of the Republic of China ( ROC , Taiwan ) was accidentally played instead of the PRC 's anthem , leading to the firing of top officials .
==Notable people==
* Sydney Gun-Munro , First Governor General of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
==See also==
* Outline of Grenada
* Index of Grenada-related articles
==Notes==
==References==
* Adkin , Mark . 1989 . Urgent Fury : The Battle for Grenada : The Truth Behind the Largest US Military Operation Since Vietnam . Trans-Atlantic Publications .
* Robert J. Beck Beck , Robert J . 1993 . The Grenada Invasion : Politics , Law , and Foreign Policy Decisionmaking . Boulder : Westview Press .
* Brizan , George 1984 . Grenada Island of Conflict : From Amerindians to People 's Revolution 14981979 . London , Zed Books Ltd. , publisher ; Copyright , George Brizan , 1984.
* Martin , John Angus . 2007 . AZ of Grenada Heritage . Macmillan Caribbean .
*
* Sinclair , Norma . 2003 . Grenada : Isle of Spice ( Caribbean Guides ) . Interlink Publishing Group ; 3rd edition .
* Stark , James H. 1897 . Stark 's Guide-Book and History of Trinidad including Tobago , Grenada , and St. Vincent ; also a trip up the Orinoco and a description of the great Venezuelan Pitch Lake . Boston , James H. Stark , publisher ; London , Sampson Low , Marston & Company .
* Steele , Beverley A . 2003 . Grenada : A History of Its People ( Island Histories ) . MacMillan Caribbean .
==External links==
*
* Official Website of the Government of Grenada
* Chief of State and Cabinet Members
* Grenada . The World Factbook . Central Intelligence Agency .
* Grenada at UCB Libraries GovPubs .
*
* Grenada from the BBC News .
* Presentation Brothers College
* Key Development Forecasts for Grenada from International Futures .
* The Grenada Newsletter , 19741994 in the Digital Library of the Caribbean
Category : Grenada
Category : Countries in the Caribbean
Category : Island countries
Category : Windward Islands
Category : English-speaking countries and territories
Category : Former British colonies and protectorates in the Americas
Category : Former French colonies
Category : Member states of the Caribbean Community
Category : Member states of the Commonwealth of Nations
Category : Member states of the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States
Category : Member states of the United Nations
Category : Small Island Developing States
Category:1640s establishments in the Caribbean
Category:1649 establishments in the French colonial empire
Category:1649 establishments in North America
Category:1760s establishments in the Caribbean
Category:1763 establishments in the British Empire
Category:1763 establishments in North America
Category : States and territories established in 1974
Category:1970s establishments in the Caribbean
Category:1974 establishments in North America
Category : Countries in North America <article_end> <article_start>  
Spain ( Espaa , ) , officially the Kingdom of Spain ( Reino de Espaa links=no ) , is a country in Southwestern Europe with some pockets of territory across the Strait of Gibraltar and the Atlantic Ocean . Its continental European territory is situated on the Iberian Peninsula . Its territory also includes two archipelagos : the Canary Islands off the coast of North Africa , and the Balearic Islands in the Mediterranean Sea . The African exclaves of Ceuta , Melilla , and Pen de Vlez de la Gomera make Spain the only European country to have a physical border with an African country ( Morocco ) . plazas de soberana in the Alboran Sea are also part of Spanish territory . Peninsular Spain The country 's mainland is bordered to the south and east by the Mediterranean Sea ; to the north and northeast by France , Andorra , and the Bay of Biscay ; and to the west and northwest by Portugal and the Atlantic Ocean respectively .
With an area of , Spain is the largest country in Southern Europe , the second-largest country in Western Europe and the European Union , and the List of European countries by area fourth-largest country by area on the Europe . With a population exceeding 47.3 million , Spain is the List of European countries by population sixth-most populous country in Europe , and the Member state of the European Union # List fourth-most populous country in the European Union . Spain 's capital and largest city is Madrid ; other major List of metropolitan areas in Spain include Barcelona , Valencia , Seville , Zaragoza , Mlaga , and Bilbao .
Modern humans first arrived in the Iberian Peninsula around 35,000 years ago . Various cultures developed alongside Phoenician , Ancient Greece , Celts and Carthaginian Iberia migration and settlement . The Romans conquered the region around 200 BC , naming it Hispania , after the earlier Phoenician name , Sp ( a ) n or Spania . Spain remained under Roman rule until Fall of the Western Roman Empire in the fourth century , which ushered in Germanic peoples tribal confederations from Central Europe . The Visigoths emerged as the dominant faction by the fifth century , with Visigothic Kingdom spanning much of the peninsula .
In the early eighth century , the Visigothic Kingdom was conquered by the Umayyad Caliphate , ushering over 700 years of al-Andalus Muslim rule . Islamic Spain became a major economic and intellectual center , with the city of Cordoba being among the largest and richest in Europe . Several Christian kingdoms emerged in the northern periphery of Iberia , chief among them Kingdom of Len , Kingdom of Castile , Kingdom of Aragon , Kingdom of Portugal and Kingdom of Navarre . Over the next seven centuries , an intermittent southward expansion of these kingdomsmetahistorically framed as a reconquest , or Reconquista Reconquistaculminated with the Christian seizure of the last Muslim polity , the Emirate of Granada , in 1492 . That same year , Christopher Columbus arrived in the New World on behalf of the Catholic Monarchs , whose dynastic union of Castile and Aragon is sometimes considered the emergence Spain as a unified country . From the 16th until the early 19th century , Spain ruled Spanish Empire , which was among the first List of largest empires ; its immense cultural and linguistic legacy includes over 570 million Hispanophones , making Spanish the world 's List of languages by number of native speakers second-most spoken native language , after Mandarin Chinese . Spain hosts the world 's List of World Heritage Sites in Spain third-largest number of UNESCO World Heritage Sites .
Spain is a secular state parliamentary democracy and a constitutional monarchy , with King Felipe VI of Spain as [ of state ] . It is a highly developed country and a [ income country ] , with the world 's List of countries by GDP ( nominal ) fourteenth-largest economy by nominal GDP and the List of countries by GDP ( PPP ) sixteenth-largest by PPP . Spain is a member of the United Nations ( UN ) , the European Union ( EU ) , the Eurozone , the Council of Europe ( CoE ) , the Organization of Ibero-American States ( OEI ) , the Union for the Mediterranean , the North Atlantic Treaty Organization ( NATO ) , the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development ( OECD ) , Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe ( OSCE ) , the Schengen Area , the World Trade Organization ( WTO ) and many other international organisations . While not an official member , Spain has a `` Permanent Invitation '' to the G20 summits , participating in every summit , which makes it a de facto member of the group .
== Etymology ==
The origins of the Roman Empire name Hispania , and the modern Espaa , are uncertain , although the Phoenicians and Carthaginians referred to the region as Spania , therefore the most widely accepted etymology is a Semitic languages-Phoenician language one . There have been a number of accounts and hypotheses of its origin :
The Renaissance scholar Antonio de Nebrija proposed that the word Hispania evolved from the Iberian language word Hispalis , meaning `` city of the western world '' .
argued that the root of the term span is the Phoenician language word spy , meaning `` to forge metals '' . Therefore , i-spn-ya would mean `` the land where metals are forged '' . It may be a derivation of the Phoenician I-Shpania , meaning `` island of rabbits '' , `` land of rabbits '' or `` edge '' , a reference to Spain 's location at the end of the Mediterranean ; Roman coins struck in the region from the reign of Hadrian show a female figure with a rabbit at her feet , and Strabo called it the `` land of the rabbits '' . The word in question ( compare modern Hebrew Shafan ) actually means `` Hyrax '' , possibly due to Phoenicians confusing the two animals .
Hispania may derive from the poetic use of the term Hesperia ( mythology ) , reflecting the Ancient Greece perception of Italy as a `` western land '' or `` land of the setting sun '' ( Hesperia ,  in Greek language ) and Spain , being still further west , as Hesperia ultima .
There is the claim that `` Hispania '' derives from the Basque language word Ezpanna meaning `` edge '' or `` border '' , another reference to the fact that the Iberian Peninsula constitutes the southwest corner of the European continent .
Two 15th-century Spanish Jewish scholars , Isaac Abravanel and Solomon ibn Verga , gave an explanation now considered folkloric . Both men wrote in two different published works that the first Jews to reach Spain were brought by ship by Phiros who was confederate with the king of Babylon when he laid siege to Jerusalem . Phiros was a Greeks by birth , but who had been given a kingdom in Spain . Phiros became related by marriage to Espan , the nephew of king Heracles , who also ruled over a kingdom in Spain . Heracles later renounced his throne in preference for his native Greece , leaving his kingdom to his nephew , Espan , from whom the country of Espaa ( Spain ) took its name . Based upon their testimonies , this eponym would have already been in use in Spain by c. 350 BCE .
== History ==
Iberia enters written records as a land populated largely by the Iberians , Basques and Celts . Early on its coastal areas were settled by Phoenicians who founded Western Europe 's most ancient cities Cdiz and Mlaga . Phoenician influence expanded as much of the Peninsula was eventually incorporated into the Carthaginian Empire , becoming a major theatre of the Punic Wars against the expanding Roman Empire . After an Roman conquest of Hispania , the peninsula came fully under Hispania . During the early Middle Ages it came under Visigothic Kingdom rule , and then much of it was conquered by Muslim invaders from North Africa . In a Reconquista , the small Christian kingdoms in the north gradually regained control of the peninsula . The last Muslim state Fall of Granada , the same year Columbus reached the Americas . A Spanish Empire began which saw Spain become the strongest kingdom in Europe , the leading world power for one and a half centuries , and the largest overseas empire for three centuries .
Continued wars and other problems eventually led to a diminished status . The Peninsular War led to chaos , triggering independence movements that tore apart most of the empire and left the country politically unstable . Spain suffered a devastating Spanish Civil War in the 1930s and then came under the rule of an Francoist Spain , which oversaw a period of stagnation that was followed by a surge in the growth of the economy . Eventually , democracy was Spanish transition to democracy in the form of a parliamentary constitutional monarchy . Spain joined the European Union , experiencing a cultural renaissance and steady economic growth until the beginning of the 21st century , that started a new globalised world with economic and ecological challenges .
=== Prehistory and pre-Roman peoples ===
Archaeological research at Archaeological Site of Atapuerca indicates the Iberian Peninsula was populated by [ 1.2 ; million years ago . In Atapuerca Mountains Atapuerca ] fossils have been found of the earliest known [ in Europe , the [ [ Homo antecessor ] . Modern humans first arrived in Iberia , from the north on foot , about 35,000 years ago . The best known artefacts of these prehistoric human settlements are the famous paintings in the [ [ Altamira ( cave ) of Cantabria in northern Iberia , which were created from 35,600 to 13,500 Before Common Era by Cro-Magnon . Archaeological and genetic evidence suggests that the Iberian Peninsula acted as one of several major refugia from which northern Europe was repopulated following the end of the Quaternary glaciation .
The largest groups inhabiting the Iberian Peninsula before the Roman conquest were the Iberians and the Celts . The Iberians inhabited the Mediterranean side of the peninsula , from the northeast to the southeast . The Celts inhabited much of the inner and Atlantic sides of the peninsula , from the northwest to the southwest . Basque people occupied the western area of the Pyrenees mountain range and adjacent areas , the Phoenician-influenced Tartessos culture flourished in the southwest and the Lusitanians and Vettones occupied areas in the central west . Several cities were founded along the coast by Phoenicians , and trading outposts and colonies were established by Greek colonies in the East . Eventually , Phoenician-Carthaginians expanded inland towards the meseta ; however , due to the bellicose inland tribes , the Carthaginians got settled in the coasts of the Iberian Peninsula .
=== Roman Hispania and the Visigothic Kingdom ===
During the Second Punic War , roughly between 210 and 205 ; BC the expanding Roman Republic captured Carthaginian trading colonies along the Mediterranean coast . Although it took the Romans nearly two centuries to complete the Roman conquest of the Iberian peninsula , they retained control of it for over six centuries . Roman rule was bound together by law , language , and the Roman road .
The cultures of the Celtic and Iberian populations were gradually Romanization of Hispania ( Latinised ) at different rates depending on what part of Hispania Baetica they lived in , with local leaders being admitted into the Roman aristocratic class . Hispania served as a granary for the Roman market , and its harbours exported gold , wool , olive oil , and wine . Agricultural production increased with the introduction of irrigation projects , some of which remain in use . Emperors Hadrian , Trajan , Theodosius I , and the philosopher Seneca the Younger were born in Hispania . Christianity was introduced into Hispania in the 1st century AD and it became popular in the cities in the 2nd century AD . Most of Spain 's present languages and religion , and the basis of its laws , originate from this period .
The weakening of the Western Roman Empire 's jurisdiction in Hispania began in 409 , when the Germanic peoples Suebi and Vandals , together with the Sarmatian Alans entered the peninsula at the invitation of a Roman usurper . These tribes had crossed the Rhine in early 407 and ravaged Gaul . The Suebi established a kingdom in what is today modern Galicia ( Spain ) and northern Portugal whereas the Vandals established themselves in southern Spain by 420 before crossing over to North Africa in 429 and Battle of Carthage ( 439 ) Carthage in 439 . As the western empire disintegrated , the social and economic base became greatly simplified : but even in modified form , the successor regimes maintained many of the institutions and laws of the late empire , including Christianity and assimilation to the evolving Roman culture .
The Byzantines established an occidental province , Spania , in the south , with the intention of reviving Roman rule throughout Iberia . Eventually , however , Hispania was reunited under Visigothic Kingdom . These Visigoths , or Western Goths , after Sack of Rome ( 410 ) under the leadership of Alaric I ( 410 ) , turned towards the Iberian Peninsula , with Athaulf for their leader , and occupied the northeastern portion . Wallia extended his rule over most of the peninsula , keeping the Suebians shut up in Galicia . Theodoric I took part , with the Romans and Franks , in the Battle of the Catalaunian Plains , where Attila was routed . Euric ( 466 ) , who put an end to the last remnants of Roman power in the peninsula , may be considered the first monarch of Spain , though the Suebians still maintained their independence in Galicia . Euric was also the first king to give written laws to the Visigoths . In the following reigns the Catholic kings of France assumed the role of protectors of the Hispano-Roman Catholics against the Arianism of the Visigoths , and in the Franco-Visigothic Wars which ensued Alaric II and Amalaric lost their lives .
Athanagild , having risen against King Agila , called in the Byzantines and , in payment for the succour they gave him , ceded to them the maritime places of the southeast ( 554 ) . Liuvigild restored the political unity of the peninsula , subduing the Suebians , but the religious divisions of the country , reaching even the royal family , brought on a civil war . St. Hermengild , the king 's son , putting himself at the head of the Catholics , was defeated and taken prisoner , and suffered martyrdom for rejecting communion with the Arians . Recared , son of Liuvigild and brother of St. Hermengild , added religious unity to the political unity achieved by his father , accepting the Catholic faith in the Third Council of Toledo ( 589 ) . The religious unity established by this council was the basis of that fusion of Goths with Hispano-Romans which produced the Spanish nation . Sisebut and Suintila completed the expulsion of the Byzantines from Spain .
Intermarriage between Visigoths and Hispano-Romans was prohibited , though in practice it could not be entirely prevented and was eventually legalised by Liuvigild . The Spanish-Gothic scholars such as Braulio of Zaragoza and Isidore of Seville played an important role in keeping the classical Greco-Roman world . Isidore was one of the most influential clerics and philosophers in the Middle Ages in Europe , and his theories were also vital to the conversion of the Visigothic Kingdom from an Arianism domain to a Catholic one in the Councils of Toledo . Isidore created the first western Etymologiae which had a huge impact during the Middle Ages .
=== Muslim era and Reconquista ===
In the 8th century , nearly all of the Iberian Peninsula was Umayyad conquest of Hispania ( 711718 ) by largely Moorish Muslim armies from North Africa . These conquests were part of the expansion of the Umayyad Caliphate . Only a small area in the mountainous north-west of the peninsula managed to resist the initial invasion . Legend has it that Julian , Count of Ceuta , the governor of Ceuta , in revenge for the violation of his daughter , Florinda la Cava , by King Roderic , invited the Muslims and opened to them the gates of the peninsula .
Under Sharia , Christians and Jews were given the subordinate status of dhimmi . This status permitted Christians and Jews to practice their religions as People of the Book but they were required to pay a special tax and had legal and social rights inferior to those of Muslims .
Conversion to Islam proceeded at an increasing pace . The Muwallad ( Muslims of ethnic Iberian Peninsula origin ) are believed to have formed the majority of the population of Al-Andalus by the end of the 10th century .
The Muslim community in the Iberian Peninsula was itself diverse and beset by social tensions . The Berber people of North Africa , who had provided the bulk of the invading armies , Berber Revolt from the Middle East . Over time , large Moorish populations became established , especially in the Guadalquivir River valley , the coastal plain of Valencian Community , the Ebro River valley and ( towards the end of this period ) in the mountainous region of Granada .
Crdoba , Spain , the capital of the caliphate since Abd-ar-Rahman III , was the largest , richest and most sophisticated city in western Europe . Mediterranean trade and cultural exchange flourished . Muslims imported a rich intellectual tradition from the Middle East and North Africa . Some important philosophers at the time were Averroes , Ibn Arabi and Maimonides . The Romanisation ( cultural ) cultures of the Iberian Peninsula interacted with Muslim and Jewish cultures in complex ways , giving the region a distinctive culture . Outside the cities , where the vast majority lived , the land ownership system from Roman times remained largely intact as Muslim leaders rarely dispossessed landowners and the introduction of new crops and techniques led to an expansion of agriculture introducing new produces which originally came from Asia or the former territories of the Roman Empire .
In the 11th century , the Muslim holdings fractured into rival Taifa states ( Arab , Berber , and Slav ) , allowing the small Christian states the opportunity to greatly enlarge their territories . The arrival from North Africa of the Islamic ruling sects of the Almoravids and the Almohads restored unity upon the Muslim holdings , with a stricter , less tolerant application of Islam , and saw a revival in Muslim fortunes . This re-united Islamic state experienced more than a century of successes that partially reversed Christian gains .
The Reconquista ( Reconquest ) was the centuries-long period in which Christian rule was re-established over the Iberian Peninsula . The Reconquista is viewed as beginning with the Battle of Covadonga won by Pelagius of Asturias in 722 and was concurrent with the period of Muslim rule on the Iberian Peninsula . The Christian army 's victory over Muslim forces led to the creation of the Christian Kingdom of Asturias along the northwestern coastal mountains . Shortly after , in 739 , Muslim forces were driven from Galicia ( Spain ) , which was to eventually host one of medieval Europe 's holiest sites , Santiago de Compostela and was incorporated into the new Christian kingdom .
The Vikings invaded Galicia in 844 , but were heavily defeated by Ramiro I of Asturias at A Corua . Many of the Vikings ' casualties were caused by the Galicians ' ballistas  powerful torsion-powered projectile weapons that looked rather like giant crossbows . 70 Viking ships were captured and burned . Vikings raided Galicia in 859 , during the reign of Ordoo I of Asturias . Ordoo was at the moment engaged against his constant enemies the Moors ; but a count of the province , Don Pedro , attacked the Vikings and defeated them .
The Kingdom of Len was the strongest Christian kingdom for centuries . In 1188 the first modern parliamentary session in Europe was held in Len ( Spain ) ( Cortes of Len ) . The Kingdom of Castile , formed from Leonese territory , was its successor as strongest kingdom . The kings and the nobility fought for power and influence in this period . The example of the Roman emperors influenced the political objective of the Crown , while the nobles benefited from feudalism .
Muslim armies had also moved north of the Pyrenees but they were defeated by Frankish forces at the Battle of Tours , Francia and pushed out of the very southernmost region of France along the seacoast by the 760s . Later , Franks forces established Marca Hispanica on the southern side of the Pyrenees . These areas were to grow into the kingdoms of kingdom of Navarre and kingdom of Aragon . For several centuries , the fluctuating frontier between the Muslim and Christian controlled areas of Iberia was along the Ebro and Douro valleys .
The Transmission of the Classics is the main Islamic contributions to Medieval Europe . The Old Spanish languagemore commonly known ( especially later in history and at present ) as `` Spanish '' after becoming the national language and lingua franca of Spainevolved from Vulgar Latin , as did other Romance languages of Spain like the Old Catalan , Astur-Leonese and Galician-Portuguese languages , as well as other Romance languages in Latin Europe . Basque language , the only non-Romance language in Spain , continued evolving from Early Basque to Medieval . The Glosas Emilianenses ( found at the Monasteries of San Milln de la Cogolla and written in Latin , Basque and Romance ) hold a great value as one of the first written examples of Iberian Romance .
The break-up of Al-Andalus into the competing taifa kingdoms helped the long embattled Iberian Christian kingdoms gain the initiative . The capture of the strategically central city of Toledo , Spain in 1085 marked a significant shift in the balance of power in favour of the Christian kingdoms . Following a great Muslim resurgence in the 12th century , the great Moorish strongholds in the south fell to Castile in the 13th centuryCrdoba in 1236 and Seville in 1248 . The County of Barcelona and the Kingdom of Aragon entered in a dynastic union and gained territory and power in the Mediterranean . In 1229 Majorca was conquered , so was Valencia in 1238 . In the 13th and 14th centuries , the Marinid dynasty of Morocco invaded and established some enclaves on the southern coast but failed in their attempt to re-establish North African rule in Iberia and were soon driven out .
After 781 years of Muslim presence in Spain , the last Nasrid dynasty sultanate of Granada , a tributary ( political ) would finally surrender in 1492 to the Catholic monarchs Isabella I of Castile of Crown of Castile and Ferdinand II of Aragon of Crown of Aragn .
From the mid 13th century , literature and philosophy started to flourish again in the Christian peninsular kingdoms , based on Roman and Gothic traditions . An important philosopher from this time is Ramon Llull . Abraham Cresques was a prominent Jewish cartographer . Roman law and its institutions were the model for the legislators . The king Alfonso X of Castile focused on strengthening this Roman and Gothic past , and also on linking the Iberian Christian kingdoms with the rest of medieval European Christendom . Alfonso worked for being elected emperor of the Holy Roman Empire and published the Siete Partidas code . The Toledo School of Translators is the name that commonly describes the group of scholars who worked together in the city of Toledo during the 12th and 13th centuries , to translate many of the philosophical and scientific works from Classical Arabic , Ancient Greek , and Biblical Hebrew .
The 13th century also witnessed the Crown of Aragon , centred in Spain 's north east , expand its reach across islands in the Mediterranean , to Sicily and Naples . Around this time the universities of University of Palencia ( 1212/1263 ) and University of Salamanca ( 1218/1254 ) were established . The Black Death of 1348 and 1349 devastated Spain .
The Catalans and Aragonese offered themselves to the Byzantine Emperor Andronicus II Palaeologus to Catalan campaign in Asia Minor . Having conquered these , they turned their arms against the Byzantines , who treacherously slew their leaders ; but for this treachery , the Spaniards , under Bernard of Rocafort and Berenguer of Entenca , exacted the terrible penalty celebrated in history as `` The Catalan Vengeance '' and Battle of Halmyros the Frankish Greece Duchy of Athens ( 1311 ) . The royal line of Aragon became extinct with Martin the Humane , and the Compromise of Caspe gave the Crown to the House of Trastmara , already reigning in Castile .
As in the rest of Europe during the Late Middle Ages , Antisemitism in Spain greatly increased during the 14th century in the Christian kingdoms ( a key event in that regard was the Black Death , as Jews were accused of poisoning the waters ) . There were mass killings in Aragon in the mid-14th century , and 12,000 Jews were killed in Toledo . In 1391 , Christian mobs went from town to town throughout Castile and Aragon , killing an estimated 50,000 Jews . Women and children were sold as slaves to Muslims , and many synagogues were converted into churches . According to Hasdai Crescas , about 70 Jewish communities were destroyed . St. Vincent Ferrer converted innumerable Jews , among them the Rabbi Josuah Halorqui , who took the name of Jernimo de Santa Fe and in his town converted many of his former coreligionists in the famous Disputation of Tortosa ( 141314 ) .
=== Spanish Empire ===
In 1469 , the crowns of the Christian kingdoms of Crown of Castile and Crown of Aragon were united by the Catholic Monarchs of Isabella I of Castile and Ferdinand II of Aragon . 1478 commenced the completion of the conquest of the Canary Islands and in 1492 , the combined forces of Castile and Aragon captured the Emirate of Granada from its last ruler Muhammad XII of Granada , ending the last remnant of a Timeline of the Muslim presence in the Iberian peninsula 781-year presence of Islamic rule in Iberia .
That same year , History of the Jews in Spain Spain 's Jews were converso to Catholicism or face Alhambra Decree from Spanish territories during the Spanish Inquisition . As many as 200,000 Jews were Expulsion of Jews from Spain . This was followed by expulsions in Expulsion of the Jews from Sicily and Persecution of Jews and Muslims by Manuel I of Portugal . The Treaty of Granada guaranteed religious tolerance towards Muslims , for a few years before Islam was outlawed in 1502 in the Kingdom of Castile and 1527 in the Kingdom of Aragon , leading to Spain 's Muslim population becoming nominally Christian Moriscos . A few decades after the Morisco rebellion of Granada known as the War of the Alpujarras , a significant proportion of Spain 's formerly-Muslim population was expelled , settling primarily in North Africa . From 1609 to 1614 , over 300,000 Moriscos were sent on ships to North Africa and other locations , and , of this figure , around 50,000 died resisting the Expulsion of the Moriscos , and 60,000 died on the journey .
The year 1492 also marked the arrival of Christopher Columbus in the New World , during a voyage funded by Isabella . Columbus 's first voyage crossed the Atlantic and reached the Caribbean Islands , beginning the European exploration and conquest of the Americas , although Columbus remained convinced that he had reached the Orient . Large numbers of Indigenous peoples of the Americas died in battle against the Spaniards during the conquest , while others died from various other causes . Some scholars consider the initial period of the Spanish colonization of the Americas from Columbus 's first landing in the Bahamas until the middle of the sixteenth centuryas marking the most egregious case of genocide in the history of mankind . The death toll may have reached some 70 million indigenous people ( out of 80 million ) in this period , as diseases such as smallpox , measles , influenza , and typhus , brought to the Americas by the conquest , decimated the pre-Columbian population .
The European colonization of the Americas started with conquistadores like Hernn Corts and Francisco Pizarro . Miscegenation was the rule between the native and the Spanish cultures and people . Juan Sebastian Elcano completed the first voyage around the world in human history , the Timeline of the MagellanElcano circumnavigation Magellan-Elcano circumnavigation . Florida was colonised by Pedro Menndez de Avils when he founded St. Augustine , Florida and then Spanish assault on French Florida an attempt led by the French Captain Jean Ribault to establish a French foothold in Spanish Florida territory . St. Augustine became a strategic defensive base for Spanish ships full of gold and silver sailing to Spain . Andrs de Urdaneta discovered the tornaviaje or return route from the Philippines to Mexico , making possible the Manila galleon trading route . The Spanish once again encountered Islam , but this time in Southeast Asia and in order to incorporate the Philippines , Spanish expeditions organised from newly Christianised Mexico had Castilian War the Philippine territories of the Sultanate of Brunei . The Spanish considered the war with the Muslims of Spanish-Moro Wars , a repeat of the Reconquista . The Spanish explorer Blas Ruiz CambodianSpanish War in Cambodia 's succession and installed Crown Prince Barom Reachea II as puppet .
As Renaissance New Monarchs , Isabella and Ferdinand centralised royal power at the expense of local nobility , and the word Espaa , whose root is the ancient name Hispania , began to be commonly used to designate the whole of the two kingdoms .
With their wide-ranging political , legal , religious and military reforms , Spain emerged as the first Historical powers # Spanish Empire . The death of their son John , Prince of Asturias caused the Crown to pass to Charles I ( the Emperor Charles V , Holy Roman Emperor ) , son of Juana la Loca .
The unification of the crowns of Aragon and Castile by the marriage of their sovereigns laid the basis for modern Spain and the Spanish Empire , although each kingdom of Spain remained a separate country socially , politically , legally , and in currency and language .
There were two big revolts against the new Habsburg monarch and the more authoritarian and imperial-style crown : Revolt of the Comuneros in Castile ( historical region ) and Revolt of the Brotherhoods in Majorca and Valencia . After years of combat , Comuneros Juan Lpez de Padilla , Juan Bravo and Francisco Maldonado were executed and Mara Pacheco went into exile . Germaine of Foix also finished with the revolt in the Mediterranean .
Habsburg Spain was one of the leading world powers throughout the 16th century and most of the 17th century , a position reinforced by trade and wealth from colonial possessions and became the world 's leading Spanish Navy . It reached its apogee during the reigns of the first two Spanish HabsburgsCharles I of Spain ( 15161556 ) and Philip II of Spain ( 15561598 ) . This period saw the Italian Wars , the Schmalkaldic War , the Dutch Revolt , the War of the Portuguese Succession , clashes with the Ottoman Empire , intervention in the French Wars of Religion and the Anglo-Spanish War ( 15851604 ) Anglo-Spanish War .
Through exploration and conquest or royal marriage alliances and inheritance , the Spanish Empire expanded to include vast areas in the Americas , islands in the Asia-Pacific area , areas of Italy , cities in Northern Africa , as well as parts of what are now France , Germany , Belgium , Luxembourg , and the Netherlands . The Timeline of Magellan 's circumnavigation of the world was carried out in 15191521 . It was the first empire on which it was said that the empire on which the sun never sets . This was an Age of Discovery , with daring explorations by sea and by land , the opening-up of new trade routes across oceans , conquests and the beginnings of European colonialism . Spanish explorers brought back precious metals , spices , luxuries , and previously unknown plants , and played a leading part in transforming the European understanding of the globe . The cultural efflorescence witnessed during this period is now referred to as the Spanish Golden Age . The expansion of the empire caused immense upheaval in the Americas as the collapse of societies and empires and new diseases from Europe devastated American indigenous populations . The rise of [ the Counter-Reformation ] and new geographical discoveries and conquests raised issues that were addressed by the intellectual movement now known as the [ [ School of Salamanca , which developed the first modern theories of what are now known as international law and human rights . Juan Luis Vives was another prominent humanist during this period .
Spain 's 16th-century maritime supremacy was demonstrated by the victory over the Ottomans at Battle of Lepanto in 1571 , and then after the setback of the Spanish Armada in 1588 , in a series of victories against England in the Anglo-Spanish War ( 15851604 ) Anglo-Spanish War of 15851604 . However , during the middle decades of the 17th century Spain 's maritime power went into a long decline with mounting defeats against the Dutch Republic and then England ; that by the 1660s it was struggling grimly to defend its overseas possessions from pirates and privateers .
The Protestant Reformation dragged the kingdom ever more deeply into the mire of religiously charged wars . The result was a country forced into ever-expanding military efforts across Europe and in the Mediterranean . By the middle decades of a war- and Great Plague of Seville-ridden 17th-century Europe , the Spanish Habsburgs had enmeshed the country in continent-wide religious-political conflicts . These conflicts drained it of resources and undermined the economy generally . Spain managed to hold on to most of the scattered Habsburg Monarchy , and help the imperial forces of the Holy Roman Empire reverse a large part of the advances made by Protestant forces , but it was finally forced to recognise the Portuguese Restoration War and the United Provinces , and eventually suffered some serious military reverses to France in the latter stages of the immensely destructive , Europe-wide Thirty Years ' War . In the latter half of the 17th century , Spain went into a gradual decline , during which it surrendered several small territories to France and England ; however , it maintained and enlarged its vast overseas empire , which remained intact until the beginning of the 19th century .
The decline culminated in a controversy over succession to the throne which consumed the first years of the 18th century . The War of the Spanish Succession was a wide-ranging international conflict combined with a civil war , and was to cost the kingdom its European possessions and its position as one of the leading powers on the Continent .
During this war , a new dynasty originating in France , the House of Bourbon , was installed . Long united only by the Crown , a true Spanish state was established when the first Bourbon king , Philip V of Spain , united the crowns of Castile and Aragon into a single state , abolishing many of the old regional privileges and laws .
The 18th century saw a gradual recovery and an increase in prosperity through much of the empire . The new Bourbon monarchy drew on the French system of modernising the administration and the economy . Enlightenment in Spain ideas began to gain ground among some of the kingdom 's elite and monarchy . Bourbon Reforms created formal disciplined militias across the Atlantic . Spain needed every hand it could take during the seemingly endless wars of the eighteenth centurythe Spanish War of Succession or Queen Anne 's War ( 170213 ) , the War of Jenkins ' Ear ( 173942 ) which became the War of the Austrian Succession ( 174048 ) , the Seven Years ' War ( 175663 ) and the Spain and the American Revolutionary War Anglo-Spanish War ( 177983 ) and its new disciplined militias served around the Atlantic as needed .
=== Liberalism and nation state ===
In 1793 , Spain went to war against the revolutionary new First French Republic as a member of War of the First Coalition . The subsequent War of the Pyrenees polarised the country in a reaction against the Francization elites and following defeat in the field , peace was made with France in 1795 at the Peace of Basel in which Spain lost control over two-thirds of the island of Hispaniola . The Prime Minister , Manuel Godoy , Prince of the Peace , then ensured that Spain allied herself with France in the brief War of the Third Coalition which ended with the British naval victory at the Battle of Trafalgar in 1805 . In 1807 , a secret treaty between Napoleon and the unpopular prime minister led to a new declaration of war against Britain and Portugal . Napoleon 's troops entered the country to invade Portugal but instead occupied Spain 's major fortresses . The Spanish king abdicated in favour of Napoleon I of France Napoleon 's brother , Joseph Bonaparte .
Joseph Bonaparte was seen as a puppet monarch and was regarded with scorn by the Spanish . The Dos de Mayo Uprising was one of many nationalist uprisings across the country against the Bonapartist regime . These revolts marked the beginning of a devastating Peninsular War against the Napoleonic regime . The most celebrated battles of this war were those of Battles of El Bruch , in the highlands of Montserrat , in which the Catalan peasantry routed a French army ; Battle of Bailn , where Francisco Javier Castaos , 1st Duke of Bailn , at the head of the army of Andalusia , defeated Pierre Dupont de l'tang ; and the sieges of Second Siege of Zaragoza and Third Siege of Girona , which were worthy of the ancient Spaniards of Siege of Saguntum and Siege of Numantia .
Napoleon was forced to intervene personally , defeating several Spanish armies and forcing a British army to retreat . However , further military action by Spanish armies , guerrillas and Arthur Wellesley , 1st Duke of Wellington Wellington 's British-Portuguese forces , combined with Napoleon 's disastrous Napoleon 's Invasion of Russia , led to the ousting of the French imperial armies from Spain in 1814 , and the return of Ferdinand VII of Spain .
During the war , in 1810 , a revolutionary body , the Cortes of Cdiz , was assembled to co-ordinate the effort against the Bonapartist regime and to prepare a constitution . It met as one body , and its members represented the entire Spanish empire . In 1812 , a Spanish Constitution of 1812 for universal representation under a constitutional monarchy was declared , but after the fall of the Bonapartist regime , Ferdinand VII dismissed the Cortes Generales and was determined to rule as an Absolute monarchy . These events foreshadowed the conflict between conservatives and liberals in the 19th and early 20th centuries .
Spain 's conquest by France benefited Latin American anti-colonialists who resented the Imperial Spanish government 's policies that favoured Spanish-born citizens ( Peninsulars ) over those born overseas ( Criollo people ) and demanded retroversion of the sovereignty to the people . Starting in 1809 Spain 's American colonies began a series of revolutions and declared independence , leading to the Spanish American wars of independence that ended Spanish control over its mainland colonies in the Americas . King Ferdinand VII 's attempt to Reconquista ( Spanish America ) re-assert control proved futile as he faced opposition not only in the colonies but also in Spain and Ferdinand VII of Spain # Revolt followed , led by liberal officers . By the end of 1826 , the only American colonies Spain held were Cuba and Puerto Rico .
The Napoleonic War left Spain economically ruined , deeply divided and politically unstable . In the 1830s and 1840s , Carlism ( a reactionary legitimist movement supportive of the branch issued from Infante Carlos , Count of Molina , younger brother of Ferdinand VII ) , fought against the Christinos or isabelinos ( supportive of Queen Isabella II of Spain , daughter of Ferdinand VII ) in the Carlist Wars . Isabelline forces prevailed , but the conflict between Progressive Party ( Spain ) and Moderate Party ( Spain ) ended in a weak early constitutional period . After the Glorious Revolution ( Spain ) of 1868 and the short-lived First Spanish Republic , the latter yielded to a stable monarchic period , the Restoration ( Spain ) , a rigid bipartisan regime fuelled up by the Turno ( the prearranged rotation of government control between liberals and conservatives ) and the form of political representation at the countryside ( based on clientelism ) known as .
In the late 19th century nationalist movements arose in the Philippines and Cuba . In 1895 and 1896 the Cuban War of Independence and the Philippine Revolution broke out and eventually the United States became involved . The SpanishAmerican War was fought in the spring of 1898 and resulted in Spain losing the last of its once vast colonial empire outside of North Africa . El Desastre ( the Disaster ) , as the war became known in Spain , gave added impetus to the Generation of '98 who were analyzing the country .
Although the period around the turn of the century was one of increasing prosperity , the 20th century brought little social peace ; Spain played a minor part in the scramble for Africa , with the colonisation of Western Sahara , Spanish Morocco and Equatorial Guinea . It remained neutral during World War I ( see Spain in World War I ) . The heavy losses suffered during the Rif War ( 1920 ) in Morocco brought discredit to the government and undermined the monarchy .
Industrialisation , the development of railways and incipient capitalism developed in several areas of the country , particularly in Barcelona , as well as Labour movement and socialist and anarchist ideas . The 1888 Barcelona Universal Exposition and the 1870 Barcelona Labour Congress are good examples of this . In 1879 , Spanish Socialist Workers ' Party is founded . Linked trade union to this party , Unin General de Trabajadores , was founded in 1888 . In the anarcho-sindicalist trend of the labour movement in Spain , Confederacin Nacional del Trabajo was founded in 1910 and Federacin Anarquista Ibrica in 1927.
Catalanism and vasquism , alongside other nationalisms and regionalisms in Spain , arose in that period , being the Basque Nationalist Party formed in 1895 and Regionalist League of Catalonia in 1901.
Political corruption and repression weakened the democratic system of the constitutional monarchy of a two-parties system . The Tragic Week ( Spain ) events and repression examples the social instability of the time .
The La Canadiense strike in 1919 led to the first law limiting the working day to eight hours .
After a period of dictatorship during the governments of Generals Miguel Primo de Rivera and Dmaso Berenguer and Admiral Juan Bautista Aznar-Cabaas Aznar-Cabaas ( 19231931 ) , the first elections since 1923 , largely understood as a plebiscite on Monarchy , took place : the 1931 Spanish local elections . These gave a resounding victory to the Republican-Socialist candidacies in large cities and provincial capitals , with a majority of monarchist councilors in rural areas . The king left the country and the proclamation of the Republic on 14 April ensued , with the formation of a provisional government .
A Spanish Constitution of 1931 for the country was passed in October 1931 following the 1931 Spanish general election , and a series of cabinets presided by Manuel Azaa supported by republican parties and the Spanish Socialist Workers ' Party followed . In the election held in 1933 the right triumphed and in 1936 , the left . During the Second Spanish Republic there was a great political and social upheaval , marked by a sharp radicalization of the left and the right . The violent acts during this period included the burning of churches , the Sanjurjada 1932 failed coup d'tat led by Jos Sanjurjo , the Revolution of 1934 and numerous attacks against rival political leaders . On the other hand , it is also during the Second Republic when important reforms to modernize the country were initiated : a democratic constitution , agrarian reform , restructuring of the army , political decentralization and Women 's suffrage women 's right to vote .
=== Civil War and Francoist dictatorship ===
The Spanish Civil War broke out in 1936 : on 17 and 18 July , part of the military Spanish coup of July 1936 carried out a coup d'tat that triumphed in only part of the country . The situation led to a civil war , in which the territory was divided into two zones : one Republican faction ( Spanish Civil War ) , that counted on outside support from the Soviet Union and Mexico ( and from Foreign involvement in the Spanish Civil War # International Brigades ) , and the other controlled by the putschists ( the Nationalist faction ( Spanish Civil War ) ) , most critically supported by Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy ( 19221943 ) . The Republic was not supported by the Western powers due to the British-led policy of non-intervention . General Francisco Franco was sworn in as the supreme leader of the rebels on 1 October 1936 . An uneasy relationship between the Republican government and the grassroots anarchists who had initiated a partial Spanish Revolution of 1936 also ensued .
The civil war was viciously fought and there were Spanish Civil War # Atrocities . The Spanish Civil War claimed the lives of over 500,000 people and caused the flight of up to a half-million citizens from the country . On 1 April 1939 , five months before the beginning of World War II , the rebel side led by Franco emerged victorious , imposing a dictatorship over the whole country .
The regime remained chiefly neutrality ( international relations ) `` neutral '' from a nominal standpoint in the Second World War ( it briefly switched its position to `` non-belligerent '' ) , although it was Spain in World War II to Axis Powers and provided the Nazi Wehrmacht with Blue Division . The only legal party under Franco 's dictatorship was the Falange Espaola Tradicionalista y de las JONS ( FET y de las JONS ) , formed in 1937 upon the merging of the Fascist Falange Espaola de las JONS and the Carlist traditionalists and to which the rest of right-wing groups supporting the rebels also added . The name of `` Movimiento Nacional '' , sometimes understood as a wider structure than the FET y de las JONS proper , largely imposed over the later 's name in official documents along the 1950s .
After World War II Spain was politically and economically isolated , and was kept out of the United Nations . This changed in 1955 , during the Cold War period , when it became strategically important for the US to establish a military presence on the Iberian Peninsula as a counter to any possible move by the Soviet Union into the Mediterranean basin . In the 1960s , Spain registered an Spanish miracle which was propelled by Spanish miracle # Industrialisation , a Spanish miracle # Rural exodus from rural areas to Madrid , Barcelona and the Basque Country ( autonomous community ) and the creation of a Spanish miracle # Mass tourism . Franco 's rule was also characterised by Francoist Spain # Authoritarianism , Francoist Spain # Spanish nationalism , National Catholicism , and Language policies of Francoist Spain .
On 17 January 1966 , 1966 Palomares B-52 crash occurred between a B-52G and a KC-135 Stratotanker over Palomares , Almera . The conventional explosives in two of the B28 nuclear bomb-type TellerUlam designs detonated upon impact with the ground , dispersing plutonium over nearby farms .
=== Restoration of democracy ===
In 1962 , a group of politicians involved in the opposition to Franco 's regime inside the country and in exile met in the congress of the European Movement in Munich , where they made a resolution in favour of democracy .
With Franco 's death in November 1975 , Juan Carlos I of Spain succeeded to the position of King of Spain and [ of state ] in accordance with the franquist law . With the approval of the new Spanish Constitution of 1978 and the Spanish transition to democracy , the State devolution much authority to the regions and created an internal organisation based on autonomous communities of Spain . The Spanish 1977 Amnesty Law let people of Franco 's regime continue inside institutions without consequences , even perpetrators of some crimes during transition to democracy like the Massacre of 3 March 1976 in Vitoria or 1977 Massacre of Atocha .
In the Basque Country , moderate Basque nationalism coexisted with a Basque Conflict led by the armed organisation ETA ( separatist group ) until the latter 's dissolution in May 2018 . The group was formed in 1959 during Franco 's rule but has continued to wage its violent campaign even after the restoration of democracy and the return of a large measure of regional autonomy .
On 23 February 1981 , rebel elements among the security forces seized the Cortes in an attempt to impose 23-F a military-backed government . King Juan Carlos took personal command of the military and successfully ordered the coup plotters , via national television , to surrender .
During the 1980s the democratic restoration made possible a growing open society . New cultural movements based on freedom appeared , like La Movida Madrilea and a culture of human rights arose with Gregorio Peces-Barba . On 30 May 1982 Spain joined NATO , followed by 1986 Spanish NATO membership referendum after a strong social opposition . That year the Spanish Socialist Workers Party ( PSOE ) came to power , the first left-wing government in 43 years . In 1986 Spain joined the European Economic Community , which later became the European Union . The PSOE was replaced in government by the People 's Party ( Spain ) ( PP ) in 1996 after scandals around participation of the government of Felipe Gonzlez in the GAL ( paramilitary group ) ; at that point the PSOE had served almost 14 consecutive years in office .
On 1 January 2002 , Spain fully adopted the euro , and Spain experienced strong economic growth , well above the EU average during the early 2000s . However , well-publicised concerns issued by many economic commentators at the height of the boom warned that extraordinary property prices and a high foreign trade deficit were likely to lead to a painful economic collapse .
In 2002 the Prestige oil spill occurred with big ecological consequences along Spain 's Atlantic coastline . In 2003 Jos Mara Aznar supported US president George W. Bush in the Iraq War , and a strong movement against war rose in Spanish society . On 11 March 2004 a local Islamist terrorist group inspired by Al-Qaeda carried out the largest terrorist attack in Spanish history when they killed 191 people and wounded more than 1,800 others by 2004 Madrid train bombings in Madrid . Though initial suspicions focused on the Basque terrorist group ETA ( separatist group ) , evidence soon emerged indicating Islamist involvement . Because of the proximity of the 2004 Spanish general election , the issue of responsibility quickly became a political controversy , with the main competing parties PP and PSOE exchanging accusations over the handling of the incident . The elections on 14 March were won by the PSOE , led by Jos Luis Rodrguez Zapatero .
The proportion of Immigration to Spain # Currently Spain 's foreign born population increased rapidly during its economic boom in the early 2000s , but then declined due to the financial crisis . In 2005 the Spanish government legalised Same-sex marriage in Spain . Decentralisation was supported with much resistance of Constitutional Court and conservative opposition , so did gender politics like quotas or the law against gender violence . Government talks with ETA happened , and the group announced its permanent cease of violence in 2010.
The bursting of the Spanish property bubble in 2008 led to the 200816 Spanish financial crisis . High levels of unemployment , cuts in government spending and corruption in Royal family and People 's Party ( Spain ) People 's Party served as a backdrop to the 201112 Spanish protests . Catalan independentism also rose . In 2011 , Mariano Rajoy 's conservative People 's Party ( Spain ) People 's Party won the election with 44.6 % of votes . As prime minister , he continued to implement austerity measures required by the EU Stability and Growth Pact . On 19 June 2014 , the Monarchy of Spain , Juan Carlos , abdicated in favour of his son , who became Felipe VI .
A 2017 Catalan independence referendum was held on 1 October 2017 and then , on 27 October , the Catalan parliament voted to unilaterally declare 2017 Catalonia declaration of independence to form a Catalan Republic on the day the Senate of Spain was discussing approving direct rule over Catalonia as called for by the Spanish Prime Minister . Later that day the Senate granted the power to impose direct rule and Mr Rajoy dissolved the Catalan parliament and called a new election . No country recognised Catalonia as a separate state .
On 1 June 2018 , the Congress of Deputies passed a motion of no-confidence against Rajoy and replaced him with the PSOE leader Pedro Snchez ( politician ) .
On 31 January 2020 , the COVID-19 virus was confirmed to have COVID-19 pandemic in Spain . On 25 March , the death toll in Spain was the second highest in the world .
== Geography ==
At , Spain is the world 's List of countries and outlying territories by area fifty-second largest country and Area and population of European countries Europe 's fourth largest country . It is some smaller than France and larger than the US state of California . Mount Teide ( Tenerife ) is the highest mountain peak in Spain and is the third largest volcano in the world from its base . Spain is a List of transcontinental countries , having territory in both Europe and Africa .
Spain lies between latitudes 27th parallel north 27 and 44th parallel north 44 N , and longitudes 19th meridian west 19 W and 5th meridian east 5 E.
On the west , Spain is bordered by Portugal ; on the south , it is bordered by Gibraltar ( a British overseas territory ) and Morocco , through its exclaves in North Africa ( Ceuta and Melilla , and the peninsula of Pen de Vlez de la Gomera ) . On the northeast , along the Pyrenees mountain range , it is bordered by France and Andorra . Along the Pyrenees in province of Girona , a small exclave town called Llvia is surrounded by France .
Extending to , the PortugalSpain border is the List of countries and territories by land borders within the European Union .
=== Islands ===
Spain also includes the Balearic Islands in the Mediterranean Sea , the Canary Islands in the Atlantic Ocean and a number of uninhabited islands on the Mediterranean side of the Strait of Gibraltar , known as plazas de soberana ( `` places of sovereignty '' , or territories under Spanish sovereignty ) , such as the Chafarinas Islands and Pen de Alhucemas . The peninsula of Pen de Vlez de la Gomera is also regarded as a plaza de soberana . The isle of Alboran Island , located in the Mediterranean between Spain and North Africa , is also administered by Spain , specifically by the municipality of Almera , Andalusia . The little Pheasant Island in the River Bidasoa is a Spanish-French condominium ( international law ) .
The ten most populous islands of Spain ( 2019 ) :
{ class= '' wikitable '' style= '' font-size : 95 % ''
-
! Island ! ! Population
-
Tenerife 917,841
-
Mallorca 896,038
-
Gran Canaria 851,231
-
Lanzarote 152,289
-
Ibiza ( Eivissa ) 147,914
-
Fuerteventura 116,887
-
Menorca 93,397
-
La Palma 82,671
-
La Gomera 21,503
-
Formentera 12,111
}
=== Mountains and rivers ===
Mainland Spain is a mountainous country , dominated by high plateaus and mountain chains . After the Pyrenees , the main mountain ranges are the Cantabrian Mountains ( Cantabrian Range ) , Sistema Ibrico ( Iberian System ) , Sistema Central ( Central System ) , Montes de Toledo , Sierra Morena and the Sistema Btico ( Baetic System ) whose highest peak , the Mulhacn , located in Sierra Nevada ( Spain ) , is the highest elevation in the Iberian Peninsula . The highest point in Spain is the Teide , a active volcano in the Canary Islands . The Meseta Central ( often translated as `` Inner Plateau '' ) is a vast plateau in the heart of peninsular Spain .
There are several major rivers in Spain such as the Tagus ( Tajo ) , Ebro , Guadiana River , Douro ( Duero ) , Guadalquivir , Jcar River , Segura , Turia River and Minho River ( Mio ) . Alluvial plains are found along the coast , the largest of which is that of the Guadalquivir in Andalusia .
=== Climate ===
Three main climatic zones can be separated , according to geographical situation and orography conditions :
* The Mediterranean climate , characterised by warm/hot and dry summers , is dominant in the peninsula . It has two varieties : Csa and Csb according to the Kppen climate classification .
* * The Csa zone is associated to areas with hot summers . It is predominant in the Mediterranean and Southern Atlantic coast and inland throughout Andalusia , Extremadura and much , if not most , of the centre of the country . The Csa zone covers climatic zones with both relatively warm and cold winters which are considered extremely different to each other at a local level , reason for which Kppen classification is often eschewed within Spain . Local climatic maps generally divide the Mediterranean zone ( which covers most of the country ) between warm-winter and cold-winter zones , rather than according to summer temperatures .
* * The Csb zone has warm rather than hot summers , and extends to additional cool-winter areas not typically associated with a Mediterranean climate , such as much of central and northern-central of Spain ( e.g . western Castile and Len CastileLen , northeastern Castilla-La Mancha and northern Community of Madrid ) and into much rainier areas ( notably Galicia ( Spain ) ) . Note areas with relatively high rainfall such as Galicia are not considered Mediterranean under local classifications , but classed as oceanic .
* The semi-arid climate ( BSk , BSh ) , is predominant in the southeastern quarter of the country , but is also widespread in other areas of Spain . It covers most of the Region of Murcia , southern Valencian Community and eastern Andalusia , where true hot desert climates also exist . Further to the north , it is predominant in the upper and mid reaches of the Ebro valley , which crosses southern Navarre , central Aragon and western Catalonia . It also is found in Madrid , Extremadura , Castilla-La Mancha , and some locations of western Andalusia . The dry season extends beyond the summer and average temperature depends on altitude and latitude .
* The oceanic climate ( Cfb ) , located in the northern quarter of the country , especially in the Atlantic region ( Basque Country ( autonomous community ) , Cantabria , Asturias , and partly Galicia and CastileLen ) . Additionally it is also found in northern Navarre , in most highlands areas along the Sistema Ibrico and in the Pyrenees valleys , where a humid subtropical variant ( Cfa ) also occurs . Winter and summer temperatures are influenced by the ocean , and have no seasonal drought .
Apart from these main types , other sub-types can be found , like the alpine climate in areas with very high altitude , the [ subtropical climate ] in areas of northeastern Spain and the continental climates ( Dfc , Dfb / Dsc , Dsb ) in the Pyrenees as well as parts of the Cordillera Cantbrica , the Sistema Central , Sierra Nevada ( Spain ) and the Sistema Ibrico , and a typical desert climate ( BWk , BWh ) in the zone of Almera , Murcia and eastern Canary Islands . Low-lying areas of the Canary Islands average above during their coldest month , thus having a tropical climate .
=== Fauna and flora ===
The fauna presents a wide diversity that is due in large part to the geographical position of the Iberian peninsula between the Atlantic and the Mediterranean and between Africa and Eurasia , and the great diversity of habitats and biotopes , the result of a considerable variety of climates and well differentiated regions .
The vegetation of Spain is varied due to several factors including the diversity of the terrain , the climate and latitude . Spain includes different phytogeographic regions , each with its own floral characteristics resulting largely from the interaction of climate , topography , soil type and fire , and Biotic component factors . The country had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 4.23/10 , ranking it 130th globally out of 172 countries .
== Politics ==
The constitutional history of Spain dates back to the constitution of 1812 . In June 1976 , Spain 's new King Juan Carlos dismissed Carlos Arias Navarro and appointed the reformer Adolfo Surez as Prime Minister . The resulting 1977 Spanish general election convened the Constituent Cortes ( the Spanish Parliament , in its capacity as a constitutional assembly ) for the purpose of drafting and approving the constitution of 1978 . After a national referendum on 6 December 1978 , 88 % of voters approved of the new constitution  a culmination of the Spanish transition to democracy .
As a result , Spain is now composed of 17 autonomous communities of Spain and two autonomous communities of Spain # Autonomous cities and `` plazas de soberana '' with varying degrees of autonomy thanks to its Constitution , which nevertheless explicitly states the indivisible unity of the Spanish nation . The constitution also specifies that Spain has no state religion and that all are free to practice and believe as they wish .
The Spanish administration approved the Gender Equality Act in 2007 aimed at furthering gender equality in Spanish political and economic life . According to Inter-Parliamentary Union data as of 1 September 2018 , 137 of the 350 members of the Congress were women ( 39.1 % ) , while in the Senate , there were 101 women out of 266 ( 39.9 % ) , placing Spain 16th on their list of countries ranked by proportion of women in the Lower House ( or Unicameral ) House . The Gender Empowerment Measure of Spain in the United Nations Human Development Report is 0.794 , 12th in the world .
=== Government ===
Spain is a constitutional monarchy , with a hereditary monarch and a bicameral parliament , the Cortes Generales ( General Courts ) .
The legislative branch is made up of the Congress of Deputies ( Congreso de los Diputados ) , a lower house with 350 members , elected by popular vote on block lists by proportional representation to serve four-year terms , and the Spanish Senate ( Senado ) , an upper house with 259 seats of which 208 are directly elected by popular vote , using a limited voting method , and the other 51 appointed by the regional legislatures to also serve four-year terms .
The executive branch consists of a Council of Ministers of Spain presided over by the Prime Minister , who is Prime Minister of Spain # Royal Nomination , Congressional Confirmation by the Monarchy of Spain after holding consultations with representatives from the different parliamentary groups , voted in by the members of the lower house during an investiture session and then formally appointed by the monarch .
* Head of State ( King )
* * Felipe VI of Spain , since 19 June 2014
* Government
* * Prime Minister of Spain ( head of government ) or `` President of the Government '' ( Presidente del Gobierno ) : Pedro Snchez Prez-Castejn , elected 1 June 2018.
* * Deputy prime ministers ( designated by the Prime Minister ) : Currently Carmen Calvo Poyato ( 1st ) , Pablo Iglesias Turrin ( 2nd ) , Nadia Calvio Santamara ( 3rd ) , Teresa Ribera Rodrguez ( 4th ) .
* * Ministers ( designated by the Prime Minister ) .
The Prime Minister , deputy prime ministers and the rest of ministers convene at the Council of Ministers of Spain .
Spain is organisationally structured as a so-called Estado de las Autonomas ( `` State of Autonomies '' ) ; it is one of the most decentralised countries in Europe , along with Switzerland , Germany and Belgium ; for example , all autonomous communities have their own elected parliaments , governments , Public Administration of Spain , budgets , and resources . Health and education systems among others are managed by the Spanish communities , and in addition , the Basque Country and Navarre also manage their own public finances based on fuero provisions . In Catalonia , the Basque Country , Navarre and the Canary Islands , a full-fledged autonomous police corps replaces some of the State police functions ( see Mossos d'Esquadra , Ertzaintza , Polica Foral/Foruzaingoa and Polica Canaria ) .
=== Foreign relations ===
After the return of democracy following the death of Francisco Franco in 1975 , Spain 's foreign policy priorities were to break out of the diplomatic isolation of the Spain under Franco and expand diplomatic relations , enter the European Union , and define security relations with the West .
As a member of NATO since 1982 , Spain has established itself as a participant in multilateral international security activities . Spain 's EU membership represents an important part of its foreign policy . Even on many international issues beyond western Europe , Spain prefers to coordinate its efforts with its EU partners through the European political co-operation mechanisms .
Spain has maintained its special relations with Hispanic America and the Philippines . Its policy emphasises the concept of an Ibero-American community , essentially the renewal of the concept of `` Hispanidad '' or `` Hispanismo '' , as it is often referred to in English , which has sought to link the Iberian Peninsula with Hispanic America through language , commerce , history and culture . It is fundamentally `` based on shared values and the recovery of democracy . ''
; Territorial disputes
Disputed status of Gibraltar , a British overseas territories in the southernmost part of the Iberian Peninsula . Then a Spanish town , it was conquered by an Anglo-Dutch force in 1704 during the War of the Spanish Succession on behalf of Charles VI , Holy Roman Emperor , pretender to the Spanish throne .
The legal situation concerning Gibraltar was settled in 1713 by the Treaty of Utrecht , in which Spain ceded the territory in perpetuity to the British Crown stating that , should the British abandon this post , it would be offered to Spain first . Since the 1940s Spain has called for the return of Gibraltar . The overwhelming majority of Gibraltarians strongly oppose this , along with any proposal of shared sovereignty . UN resolutions call on the United Kingdom and Spain to reach an agreement over the status of Gibraltar .
The Spanish claim makes a distinction between the Disputed status of the isthmus between Gibraltar and Spain that connects the Rock to the Spanish mainland on the one hand , and the Rock and city of Gibraltar on the other . While the Rock and city were ceded by the Treaty of Utrecht , Spain asserts that the `` occupation of the isthmus is illegal and against the principles of International Law '' . The United Kingdom relies on de facto arguments of possession by prescription ( sovereignty transfer ) in relation to the isthmus , as there has been `` continuous possession [ of the isthmus ] over a long period '' .
Another claim by Spain is about the Savage Islands , part of Portugal . In clash with the Portuguese position , Spain claims that they are rocks rather than islands , and therefore Spain does not accept any extension of the Portuguese Exclusive Economic Zone ( 200 nautical miles ) generated by the islands , while acknowledging the Selvagens having territorial waters ( 12 nautical miles ) . On 5 July 2013 , Spain sent a letter to the UN expressing these views .
Spain claims the sovereignty over the Perejil Island , a small , uninhabited rocky islet located in the South shore of the Strait of Gibraltar . The island lies just off the coast of Morocco , from Ceuta and from mainland Spain . Its sovereignty is disputed between Spain and Morocco . It was the subject of an armed incident between the two countries in 2002 . The incident ended when both countries agreed to return to the status quo ante which existed prior to the Moroccan occupation of the island . The islet is now deserted and without any sign of sovereignty .
Besides the Perejil Island , the Spanish-held territories claimed by other countries are two : Morocco claims the Spanish cities of Ceuta and Melilla and the plazas de soberana islets off the northern coast of Africa . Portugal does not recognise Spain 's sovereignty over the territory of Olivenza which was annexed by Spain in 1801 after the War of the Oranges . Portugal stance has been the territory being de iure Portuguese territory and de facto Spanish .
=== Military ===
The armed forces of Spain are known as the Spanish Armed Forces ( Fuerzas Armadas Espaolas ) . Their Commander-in-chief is the King of Spain , Felipe VI of Spain . The next military authorities in line are the Prime Minister and the Minister of Defence . The fourth military authority of the State is the Chief of the Defence Staff ( Spain ) ( JEMAD ) . The Defence Staff ( Spain ) ( Estado Mayor de la Defensa ) assists the JEMAD as auxiliary body .
The Spanish Armed Forces are divided into three branches :
* Spanish Army Army ( Ejrcito de Tierra )
* Spanish Navy Navy ( Armada )
* Spanish Air Force Air Force ( Ejrcito del Aire )
Military conscription was suppressed in 2001.
=== Human rights ===
The Spanish Constitution of 1978 `` protect all Spaniards and all the peoples of Spain in the exercise of human rights , their cultures and traditions , languages and institutions '' .
According to Amnesty International ( AI ) , government investigations of alleged police abuses are often lengthy and punishments were light . Violence against women was a problem , which the Government took steps to address .
Spain provides one of the highest degrees of liberty in the world for its LGBT community . Among the countries studied by Pew Research Center in 2013 , Spain is rated first in acceptance of homosexuality , with 88 % of those surveyed saying that homosexuality should be accepted .
=== Administrative divisions ===
The Spanish State is divided into 17 autonomous communities and 2 autonomous cities , both groups being the highest or first-order administrative division in the country . Autonomous communities are divided into provinces , of which there are 50 in total , and in turn , provinces are divided into municipalities . In Catalonia , two additional divisions exist , the comarques ( sing . comarca ) and the vegueries ( sing . vegueria ) both of which have administrative powers ; comarques being aggregations of municipalities , and the vegueries being aggregations of comarques . The concept of a comarca exists in all autonomous communities , however , unlike Catalonia , these are merely historical or geographical subdivisions .
==== Autonomous communities ====
Spain 's autonomous communities are the first level administrative divisions of the country . They were created after the current constitution came into effect ( in 1978 ) in recognition of the right to self-government of the `` nationalities and regions of Spain '' . The autonomous communities were to comprise adjacent provinces with common historical , cultural , and economic traits . This territorial organisation , based on devolution , is known in Spain as the `` State of Autonomies '' .
The basic institutional law of each autonomous community is the Statute of Autonomy . The Statutes of Autonomy establish the name of the community according to its historical and contemporary identity , the limits of its territories , the name and organisation of the institutions of government and the rights they enjoy according to the constitution .
The governments of all autonomous communities must be based on a division of powers and comprise
* a legislative assembly whose members must be elected by universal suffrage according to the system of proportional representation and in which all areas that integrate the territory are fairly represented ;
* a government council , with executive and administrative functions headed by a president , elected by the Legislative Assembly and nominated by the King of Spain ;
* a supreme court , under the supreme court of Spain , which heads the judiciary in the autonomous community .
Catalonia , Galicia and the Basque Country , which identified themselves as nationalities , were granted self-government through a rapid process . Andalusia also took that denomination in its first Statute of Autonomy , even though it followed the longer process stipulated in the constitution for the rest of the country . Progressively , other communities in revisions to their Statutes of Autonomy have also taken that denomination in accordance to their historical and modern identities , such as the Valencian Community , the Canary Islands , the Balearic Islands , and Aragon .
The autonomous communities have wide legislative and executive autonomy , with their own parliaments and regional governments . The distribution of powers may be different for every community , as laid out in their Statutes of Autonomy , since devolution was intended to be asymmetrical . Only two communitiesthe Basque Country and Navarrehave full fiscal autonomy . Beyond fiscal autonomy , the nationalitiesAndalusia , the Basque Country , Catalonia , and Galiciawere devolved more powers than the rest of the communities , among them the ability of the regional president to dissolve the parliament and call for elections at any time . In addition , the Basque Country , Catalonia and Navarre have police corps of their own : Ertzaintza , Mossos d'Esquadra and the Polica Foral respectively . Other communities have more limited forces or none at all , like the Polica Autnoma Andaluza in Andalusia or the BESCAM in Madrid .
Nonetheless , recent amendments to existing Statutes of Autonomy or the promulgation of new Statutes altogether , have reduced the asymmetry between the powers originally granted to the nationalities and the rest of the regions .
Finally , along with the 17 autonomous communities , two autonomous cities are also part of the State of Autonomies and are first-order territorial divisions : Ceuta and Melilla . These are two exclaves located in the northern African coast .
==== Provinces and municipalities ====
Autonomous communities are divided into Provinces of Spain , which served as their territorial building blocks . In turn , provinces are divided into municipalities of Spain . The existence of both the provinces and the municipalities is guaranteed and protected by the constitution , not necessarily by the Statutes of Autonomy themselves . Municipalities are granted autonomy to manage their internal affairs , and provinces are the territorial divisions designed to carry out the activities of the State .
The current provincial division structure is basedwith minor changeson the 1833 territorial division of Spain by Javier de Burgos , and in all , the Spanish territory is divided into 50 provinces . The communities of Asturias , Cantabria , La Rioja , the Balearic Islands , Madrid , Murcia and Navarre are the only communities that comprise a single province , which is coextensive with the community itself . In these cases , the administrative institutions of the province are replaced by the governmental institutions of the community .
== Economy ==
Spain 's capitalist mixed economy is the List of countries by GDP ( nominal ) worldwide and the List of sovereign states in Europe by GDP ( nominal ) in the European Union , as well as the Eurozone 's 4th largest .
The centre-right government of former prime minister Jos Mara Aznar worked successfully to gain admission to the group of countries launching the euro in 1999 . Unemployment in Spain stood at 17.1 % in June 2017 , below Spain 's early 1990s unemployment rate of at over 20 % . The Youth unemployment in Spain rate ( 35 % in March 2018 ) is extremely high compared to EU standards . Perennial weak points of Spain 's economy include a large informal economy , and an education system which OECD reports place among the poorest for developed countries , together with the United States and UK .
By the mid-1990s the economy had commenced the growth that had been disrupted by the global recession of the early 1990s . The strong economic growth helped the government to reduce the government debt as a percentage of GDP and Spain 's high unemployment rate began to steadily decline . With the government budget in balance and inflation under control Spain was admitted into the Eurozone in 1999.
Since the 1990s some Spanish companies have gained multinational status , often expanding their activities in culturally close Latin America . Spain is the second biggest foreign investor there , after the United States . Spanish companies have also expanded into Asia , especially China and India . This early global expansion is a competitive advantage over its competitors and European neighbours . The reason for this early expansion is the booming interest towards Spanish language and culture in Asia and Africa and a corporate culture that learned to take risks in unstable markets .
Spanish companies invested in fields like renewable energy commercialisation ( Iberdrola was the world 's largest renewable energy operator ) , technology companies like Telefnica , Abengoa , Mondragon Corporation ( which is the world 's largest Worker cooperative worker-owned cooperative ) , Movistar , Hisdesat , Indra Sistemas , train manufacturers like Construcciones y Auxiliar de Ferrocarriles , Talgo , global corporations such as the textile company Inditex , petroleum companies like Repsol or Cepsa and infrastructure , with six of the ten biggest international construction firms specialising in transport being Spanish , like Ferrovial , Acciona , Grupo ACS , Obrascn Huarte Lain and Fomento de Construcciones y Contratas .
In 2005 the Economist Intelligence Unit 's quality of life survey placed Spain among the top 10 in the world . In 2013 the same survey ( now called the `` Where-to-be-born index '' ) , ranked Spain 28th in the world .
In 2010 , the Basque Country ( autonomous community ) city of Bilbao was awarded with the Lee Kuan Yew World City Prize , and its mayor at the time , Iaki Azkuna , was awarded the World Mayor Prize in 2012 . The Basque capital city of Vitoria-Gasteiz received the European Green Capital Award in 2012.
===Automotive industry===
The automotive industry is one of the largest employers in the country . In 2015 Spain was the 8th largest automobile producer country in the world and the 2nd largest car manufacturer in Europe after Germany .
By 2016 , the automotive industry was generating 8.7 percent of Spain 's gross domestic product , employing about nine percent of the manufacturing industry . By 2008 the automobile industry was the 2nd most exported industry while in 2015 about 80 % of the total production was for export .
German companies poured 4.8 billion into Spain in 2015 , making the country the second-largest destination for German foreign direct investment behind only the U.S . The lion 's share of that investment4 billionwent to the country 's auto industry .
=== Agriculture ===
Crop areas were farmed in two highly diverse manners . Areas relying on non-irrigated cultivation ( secano ) , which made up 85 % of the entire crop area , depended solely on rainfall as a source of water . They included the humid regions of the north and the northwest , as well as vast arid zones that had not been irrigated . The much more productive regions devoted to irrigated cultivation ( regado ) accounted for 3 million hectares in 1986 , and the government hoped that this area would eventually double , as it already had doubled since 1950 . Particularly noteworthy was the development in Province of Almeraone of the most arid and desolate provinces of Spainof winter crops of various fruits and vegetables for export to Europe .
Though only about 17 % of Spain 's cultivated land was irrigated , it was estimated to be the source of between 40 and 45 % of the gross value of crop production and of 50 % of the value of agricultural exports . More than half of the irrigated area was planted in maize , fruit trees , and vegetables . Other agricultural products that benefited from irrigation included grapes , cotton , sugar beets , potatoes , legumes , olive trees , mangos , strawberries , tomatoes , and fodder grasses . Depending on the nature of the crop , it was possible to harvest two successive crops in the same year on about 10 % of the country 's irrigated land .
Citrus fruits , vegetables , cereal grains , olive oil , and wineSpain 's traditional agricultural productscontinued to be important in the 1980s . In 1983 they represented 12 % , 12 % , 8 % , 6 % , and 4 % , respectively , of the country 's agricultural production . Because of the changed diet of an increasingly affluent population , there was a notable increase in the consumption of livestock , poultry , and dairy products . Meat production for domestic consumption became the single most important agricultural activity , accounting for 30 % of all farm-related production in 1983 . Increased attention to livestock was the reason that Spain became a net importer of grains . Ideal growing conditions , combined with proximity to important north European markets , made citrus fruits Spain 's leading export . Fresh vegetables and fruits produced through intensive irrigation farming also became important export commodities , as did sunflower seed oil that was produced to compete with the more expensive olive oils in oversupply throughout the Mediterranean countries of the European Economic Community .
=== Tourism ===
In 2017 , Spain was the second most visited country in the world , recording 82 million tourists which marked the fifth consecutive year of record-beating numbers . The headquarters of the World Tourism Organization are located in Madrid .
Spain 's geographic location , popular coastlines , diverse landscapes , historical legacy , vibrant culture , and excellent infrastructure has made the country 's international tourist industry among the largest in the world . In the last five decades , international tourism in Spain has grown to become the second largest in the world in terms of spending , worth approximately 40 ; billion Euros or about 5 % of GDP in 2006.
Castile and Leon is the Spanish leader in rural tourism linked to its environmental and architectural heritage .
=== Energy ===
Spain is one of the world 's leading countries in the development and production of Renewable energy in Spain . In 2010 Spain became the solar power in Spain world leader when it overtook the United States with a massive power station plant called Alvarado I , near Badajoz Alvarado , Badajoz . Spain is also Europe 's main producer of wind energy . In 2010 its wind turbines generated 42,976 GWh , which accounted for 16.4 % of all electrical energy produced in Spain . On 9 November 2010 , wind energy reached an instantaneous historic peak covering 53 % of mainland electricity demand and generating an amount of energy that is equivalent to that of 14 nuclear reactors . Other renewable energies used in Spain are [ power plant hydroelectric ] , gasification of biomass and marine energy ( 2 power plants under construction ) .
Non-renewable energy sources used in Spain are nuclear power plant ( 8 operative reactors ) , natural gas power plant , coal power plant , and oil power plant . Fossil fuels together generated 58 % of Spain 's electricity in 2009 , just below the OECD mean of 61 % . Nuclear power generated another 19 % , and wind and hydro about 12 % each .
=== Transport ===
The Spanish road system is mainly centralised , with six highways connecting Madrid ] to the [ [ Basque Country ( autonomous community ) , Catalonia , Valencian Community , West Andalusia , Extremadura and Galicia ( Spain ) . Additionally , there are highways along the Atlantic ( Ferrol , Spain to Vigo ) , Cantabrian ( Oviedo to San Sebastin ) and Mediterranean Sea ( Girona to Cdiz ) coasts . Spain aims to put one ; million electric cars on the road by 2014 as part of the government 's plan to save energy and boost Efficient energy use . The former Minister of Industry Miguel Sebastin Gascn said that `` the electric vehicle is the future and the engine of an industrial revolution . ''
Spain has the most extensive high-speed rail network in Europe , and the second-most extensive in the world after China . As of 2019 , Spain has a total of over of high-speed tracks linking Mlaga , Seville , Madrid , Barcelona , Valencia and Valladolid , with the trains operated at commercial speeds up to . On average , the Spanish high-speed train is the fastest one in the world , followed by the Japanese Shinkansen and the French TGV . Regarding punctuality , it is second in the world ( 98.5 % on-time arrival ) after the Japanese Shinkansen ( 99 % ) . Should the aims of the ambitious AVE programme ( Spanish high speed trains ) be met , by 2020 Spain will have of high-speed trains linking almost all provincial cities to Madrid in less than three hours and Barcelona within four hours .
There are 47 public airports in Spain . The busiest one is the Madrid Airport ( Barajas ) , with 50 ; million passengers in 2011 , being the World 's busiest airports by passenger traffic world 's 15th busiest airport , as well as the European Union 's fourth busiest . The Barcelona Airport ( El Prat ) is also important , with 35 ; million passengers in 2011 , being the world 's 31st-busiest airport . Other main airports are located in Palma de Mallorca Airport ( 23 ; million passengers ) , Mlaga Airport ( 13 ; million passengers ) , Gran Canaria Airport Las Palmas ( Gran Canaria ) ( 11 ; million passengers ) , Alicante Airport ( 10 ; million passengers ) and smaller , with the number of passengers between 4 and 10 million , for example Tenerife South Airport ( two airports ) , Valencia Airport , Seville Airport , Bilbao Airport , Ibiza Airport , Lanzarote Airport , Fuerteventura Airport . Also , more than 30 airports with the number of passengers below 4 million .
=== Science and technology ===
In the 19th and 20th centuries , science in Spain was held back by severe political instability and consequent economic underdevelopment . Despite the conditions , some important scientists and engineers emerged . The most notable were Miguel Servet , Santiago Ramn y Cajal , Narcs Monturiol , Celedonio Calatayud , Juan de la Cierva , Leonardo Torres y Quevedo , Margarita Salas and Severo Ochoa .
The Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientficas ( CSIC ) is the leading public agency dedicated to scientific research in the country . It ranked as the 5th top governmental scientific institution worldwide ( and 32nd overall ) in the 2018 SCImago Institutions Rankings .
Since 2006 , the Mobile World Congress has taken place in Barcelona .
== Demographics ==
In 2019 , the population of Spain officially reached 47 ; million people , as recorded by the Padrn municipal ( Spain 's Municipal Register ) . Spain 's population density , at 91/km2 ( 235/sq mi ) , is lower than that of most Western European countries and its distribution across the country is very unequal . With the exception of the region surrounding the capital , Madrid , the most populated areas lie around the coast . The population of Spain has risen 2 1/2 times since 1900 , when it stood at 18.6 ; million , principally due to the spectacular demographic boom in the 1960s and early 1970s .
In 2017 , the average total fertility rate ( TFR ) across Spain was 1.33 children born per woman , one of the lowest in the world , below the replacement rate of 2.1 , it remains considerably below the high of 5.11 children born per woman in 1865 . Spain subsequently has one of the oldest populations in the world , with the average age of 43.1 years .
Native Spaniards make up 88 % of the total population of Spain . After the List of countries and territories by fertility rate plunged in the 1980s and Spain 's population growth rate dropped , the population again trended upward initially upon the return of many Spaniards who had emigrated to other European countries during the 1970s , and more recently , fuelled by large numbers of immigrants who make up 12 % of the population . The immigrants originate mainly in Latin America ( 39 % ) , North Africa ( 16 % ) , Eastern Europe ( 15 % ) , and Sub-Saharan Africa ( 4 % ) . In 2005 , Spain instituted a three-month amnesty programme through which certain hitherto undocumented aliens were granted legal residency .
In 2008 , Spain granted citizenship to 84,170 persons , mostly to people from Ecuador , Colombia and Morocco . A sizeable portion of foreign residents in Spain also comes from other Western and Central European countries . These are mostly British , French , German , Dutch , and Norwegian . They reside primarily on the Mediterranean coast and the Balearic islands , where many choose to live their retirement or telecommute .
Substantial populations descended from Spanish colonists and immigrants exist in other parts of the world , most notably in Latin America . Beginning in the late 15th century , large numbers of Iberian colonists settled in what became Latin America and at present most white Latin Americans ( who make up about one-third of Latin America 's population ) are of Spanish or Portuguese origin . Around 240,000 Spaniards emigrated in the 16th century , mostly to Mexico . Another 450,000 left in the 17th century . The estimate between 1492 and 1832 is 1.86 million . Between 1846 and 1932 it is estimated that nearly 5 ; million Spaniards emigrated to the Americas , especially to Argentina and Brazil . Approximately two million Spaniards migrated to other Western European countries between 1960 and 1975 . During the same period perhaps 300,000 went to Latin America .
=== Urbanisation ===
; Metropolitan areas
Source : `` reas urbanas +50 '' , Ministry of Public Works and Transport ( Spain ) ( 2013 )
- style= '' background : # efefef ; ''
! rowspan= '' 2 '' Rank
! rowspan= '' 2 '' Metro area
! rowspan= '' 2 '' Autonomouscommunity
! colspan= '' 2 '' Population
- style= '' background : # efefef ; ''
! Government data
! Other estimations
- style= '' text-align : right ; ''
1 Madrid Community of Madrid 6,052,247 style= '' text-align : left ; '' 5.4  6.5 m
- style= '' text-align : right ; ''
2 Barcelona Catalonia 5,030,679 style= '' text-align : left ; ''
- style= '' text-align : right ; ''
3 Valencia Valencian Community 1,551,585 style= '' text-align : left ; '' 1.5  2.3 m
- style= '' text-align : right ; ''
4 Seville Andalusia 1,294,867 style= '' text-align : left ; '' 1.2  1.3 m
- style= '' text-align : right ; ''
5 Mlaga Andalusia 953,251 style= '' background : silver ; ''
- style= '' text-align : right ; ''
6 Bilbao Basque Country ( autonomous community ) 910,578 style= '' background : silver ; ''
- style= '' text-align : right ; ''
7 OviedoGijnAvils Asturias 835,053 style= '' background : silver ; ''
- style= '' text-align : right ; ''
8 Zaragoza Aragon 746,152 style= '' background : silver ; ''
- style= '' text-align : right ; ''
9 AlicanteElche Valencian Community 698,662 style= '' background : silver ; ''
- style= '' text-align : right ; ''
10 Murcia Region of Murcia 643,854 style= '' background : silver ; ''
}
=== Peoples ===
The Spanish Constitution of 1978 , in its second article , recognises several contemporary politynationalities and regions of Spain and regions , within the context of the Spanish nation .
Spain has been described as a de facto plurinationalism . The identity of Spain rather accrues of an overlap of different territorial and ethnolinguistic identities than of a sole Spanish identity . In some cases some of the territorial identities may conflict with the dominant Spanish culture . Distinct traditional identities within Spain include the Basque people , Catalan people , Galician people , Andalusians and Valencian people , although to some extent all of the 17 autonomous communities may claim a distinct local identity .
It is this last feature of `` shared identity '' between the more local level or autonomous community and the Spanish level which makes the identity question in Spain complex and far from univocal .
=== Minority groups ===
Spain has a number of descendants of populations from former colonies , especially Latin America and North Africa . Smaller numbers of immigrants from several Sub-Saharan countries have recently been settling in Spain . There are also sizeable numbers of Asian immigrants , most of whom are of Middle Eastern , South Asian and Chinese origin . The single largest group of immigrants are European ; represented by large numbers of Romanians , Britons , Germans , French and others .
The arrival of the Roma in Spain , a Romani people , began in the 16th century ; estimates of the Spanish Roma population range from 750,000 to over one million . There are also the mercheros ( also quinquis ) , a formerly nomadic minority group . Their origin is unclear .
Historically , Sephardi Jews and Moriscos are the main minority groups originated in Spain and with a contribution to Spanish culture . The Spanish government is offering Spanish nationality to Sephardi Jews .
=== Immigration ===
According to the official Spanish statistics ( Instituto Nacional de Estadstica ( Spain ) ) there were 5.4 ; million foreign residents in Spain in 2020 ( 11.4 % ) while all citizens born outside of Spain were 7.2 ; million in 2020 , 15.23 % of the total population .
According to residence permit data for 2011 , more than 860,000 were Romanian , about 770,000 were Moroccan people , approximately 390,000 were British , and 360,000 were Ecuadorian people . Other sizeable foreign communities are Colombian , Bolivian , German , Italian , Bulgarians , and Chinese . There are more than 200,000 migrants from Sub-Saharan Africa living in Spain , principally Senegalese people and Nigerian people . Since 2000 , Spain has experienced high population growth as a result of immigration flows , despite a birth rate that is only half the replacement level . This sudden and ongoing inflow of immigrants , particularly those arriving illegally by sea , has caused noticeable social tension .
Within the EU , Spain had the 2nd highest immigration rate in percentage terms after Cyprus , but by a great margin , the highest in absolute numbers , up to 2008 . The number of immigrants in Spain had grown up from 500,000 people in 1996 to 5.2 ; million in 2008 out of a total population of 46 ; million . In 2005 alone , a regularisation programme increased the legal immigrant population by 700,000 people . There are a number of reasons for the high level of immigration , including Spain 's cultural ties with Latin America , its geographical position , the porosity of its borders , the large size of its underground economy and the strength of the agricultural and construction sectors , which demand more low cost labour than can be offered by the national workforce .
Another statistically significant factor is the large number of residents of EU origin typically retiring to Spain 's Mediterranean coast . In fact , Spain was Europe 's largest absorber of migrants from 2002 to 2007 , with its immigrant population more than doubling as 2.5 ; million people arrived . In 2008 , prior to the onset of the economic crisis , the Financial Times reported that Spain was the most favoured destination for Western Europeans considering a move from their own country and seeking jobs elsewhere in the EU .
In 2008 , the government instituted a `` Plan of Voluntary Return '' which encouraged unemployed immigrants from outside the EU to return to their home countries and receive several incentives , including the right to keep their unemployment benefits and transfer whatever they contributed to the Spanish Social Security . The programme had little effect ; during its first two months , just 1,400 immigrants took up the offer . What the programme failed to do , the sharp and prolonged economic crisis has done from 2010 to 2011 in that tens of thousands of immigrants have left the country due to lack of jobs . In 2011 alone , more than half a million people left Spain . For the first time in decades the net migration rate was expected to be negative , and nine out of 10 emigrants were foreigners .
=== Languages ===
Spain is legally multilingual , and the constitution establishes that the nation will protect `` all Spaniards and the peoples of Spain in the exercise of human rights , their cultures and traditions , languages and institutions .
Spanish language ( espaol )  recognised in the constitution as names given to the Spanish language ( castellano ) is the official language of the entire country , and it is the right and duty of every Spaniard to know the language . The constitution also establishes that `` the other Spanish languages '' that is , the other languages of Spainwill also be official in their respective autonomous communities in accordance to their Statute of Autonomy , their organic regional legislations , and that the `` richness of the distinct linguistic modalities of Spain represents a patrimony which will be the object of special respect and protection . ''
The other official languages of Spain , co-official with Spanish are :
* Catalan language ( catal or valenci ) in Catalonia , the Valencian Community and the Balearic Islands ;
* Galician language ( galego ) in Galicia ( Spain ) ;
* Basque language ( euskara ) in the Basque Country ( autonomous community ) and Navarre ; and
* Occitan language ( arans ) in Catalonia .
As a percentage of the general population of all Spain , Spanish is natively spoken by 74 % , Catalan by 17 % , Galician by 7 % and Basque by 2 % of all Spaniards . Occitan is spoken by less than 5,000 people , only in the small region of Val d'Aran .
Other Romance language minority languages , though not official , have special recognition , such as the Astur-Leonese language ( asturianu , bable or llions ) in Asturias and in northwestern Castile and Len , and Aragonese language ( aragons ) in Aragon .
In the North African Spanish autonomous city of Melilla , Riff language is spoken by a significant part of the population . Similarly , in Ceuta Moroccan Arabic is spoken by a significant percentage of the population . In the tourist areas of the Mediterranean coast and the islands , English and German are widely spoken by tourists , foreign residents , and tourism workers .
=== Education ===
State education in Spain is free and compulsory from the age of six to sixteen . The current education system is regulated by the 2006 educational law , LOE ( Ley Orgnica de Educacin ) , or Fundamental Law for the Education . In 2014 , the LOE was partially modified by the newer and controversial LOMCE law ( Ley Orgnica para la Mejora de la Calidad Educativa ) , or Fundamental Law for the Improvement of the Education System , commonly called Ley Wert ( Wert Law ) . Since 1970 to 2014 , Spain has had seven different educational laws ( LGE , LOECE , LODE , LOGSE , LOPEG , LOE and LOMCE ) .
The levels of education are preschool education , primary education , secondary education and post-16 education . In regards to the professional development education or the vocational education , there are three levels besides the university degrees : the Formacin Profesional Bsica ( basic vocational education ) ; the Ciclo Formativo de Grado Medio or CFGM ( medium level vocation education ) which can be studied after studying the secondary education , and the Ciclo Formativo de Grado Superior or CFGS ( higher level vocational education ) , which can be studied after studying the post-16 education level .
=== Health ===
The health care system of Spain ( Spanish National Health System ) is considered one of the best in the world , in 7th position in the ranking elaborated by the World Health Organization . The health care is public , universal and free for any legal citizen of Spain . The total health spending is 9.4 % of the GDP , slightly above the average of 9.3 % of the OECD .
=== Religion ===
Roman Catholicism , which has a long history in Spain , remains the dominant religion . Although it no longer has official status by law , in all public schools in Spain students have to choose either a religion or ethics class . Catholicism is the religion most commonly taught , although the teaching of Islam , Judaism , and evangelical Christianity is also recognised in law . According to a 2020 study by the Spanish Centre for Sociological Research , about 61 % of Spaniards self-identify as Christianity in Spain , 3 % other faiths , and about 35 % identify with irreligion . Most Spaniards do not participate regularly in religious services . A 2019 study shows that of the Spaniards who identify themselves as religious , 62 % hardly ever or never go to church , 16 % go to church some times a year , 7 % some time per month and 13 % every Sunday or multiple times per week . Recent polls and surveys suggest that 20 % to 27 % of the Spanish population is irreligious .
The Spanish constitution enshrines secularism in governance , as well as freedom of religion or belief for all , saying that no religion should have a `` state character , '' while allowing for the state to `` cooperate '' with religious groups .
There have been four Spanish Popes . Pope Damasus I , Pope Calixtus III , Pope Alexander VI and Antipope Benedict XIII . Spanish mysticism provided an important intellectual resource against Protestantism with Carmelites like Teresa of vila , a Counter-Reformation nun and John of the Cross , a priest , taking the lead in their reform movement . Later , they became Doctors of the Church . The Society of Jesus was co-founded by Ignatius of Loyola , whose Spiritual Exercises and movement led to the establishment of hundreds of colleges and universities in the world , including 28 in the United States alone . The Society 's co-founder , Francis Xavier , was a missionary who reached India and later Japan . In the 1960s , Jesuits Pedro Arrupe and Ignacio Ellacura supported the movement of Liberation Theology .
Protestant churches have about 1,200,000 members . There are about 105,000 Jehovah 's Witnesses . The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has approximately 46,000 adherents in 133 congregations in all regions of the country and has a Madrid Spain Temple in the Moratalaz District of Madrid .
A study made by the Union of Islamic Communities of Spain demonstrated that there were more than 2,100,000 inhabitants of Muslim background living in Spain , accounting for 45 % of the total population of Spain . The vast majority was composed of immigrants and descendants originating from the Maghreb ( especially Morocco ) and other African countries . More than 879,000 ( 42 % ) of them had Spanish nationality .
The recent waves of immigration have also led to an increasing number of Hindus , Buddhists , Sikhs and Muslims .
After the Reconquista in 1492 , Muslims did not live in Spain for centuries . Late 19th-century colonial expansion in northwestern Africa gave a number of residents in Spanish Morocco and Western Sahara full citizenship . Their ranks have since been bolstered by recent immigration , especially from Morocco and Algeria .
Judaism was practically non-existent in Spain from the 1492 expulsion until the 19th century , when Jews were again permitted to enter the country . Currently there are around 62,000 Jews in Spain , or 0.14 % of the total population . Most are arrivals in the past century , while some are descendants of earlier Spanish Jews . Approximately 80,000 Jews are thought to have lived in Spain prior to its expulsion . However the Jewish Encyclopedia states the number over 800,000 to be too large and 235,000 as too small : 165,000 is given as expelled as possibly too small in favour of 200,000 , and the numbers of converts after the 1391 pogroms as less . Other sources suggest 200,000 converts mostly after the pogroms of 1391 and upwards of 100,000 expelled . Descendants of these Sephardic Jews expelled in 1492 are given Spanish nationality if they request it .
== Culture ==
Spain is a Western world . Almost every aspect of Spanish life is permeated by its Roman heritage , making Spain one of the major Romance-speaking Europe of Europe . Spanish culture is marked by strong historic ties to Catholicism , which played a pivotal role in the country 's formation and subsequent identity . Spanish art , architecture , cuisine , and music have been shaped by successive waves of foreign invaders , as well as by the country 's Mediterranean climate and geography . The centuries-long colonial era globalised Spanish language and culture , with Spain also absorbing the cultural and commercial products of its diverse empire .
=== World Heritage Sites ===
Spain has 47 World Heritage Sites . These include the landscape of Monte Perdido in the Pyrenees , which is shared with France , the Prehistoric Rock Art Sites of the Ca Valley and Siega Verde , which is shared with Portugal , the Heritage of Mercury . Almadn and Idrija , shared with Slovenia and the Ancient and Primeval Beech Forests of the Carpathians and Other Regions of Europe , shared with other countries of Europe . In addition , Spain has also 14 Intangible cultural heritage , or `` Human treasures '' .
=== Literature ===
The earliest recorded examples of vernacular Romance-based literature date from the same time and location , the rich mix of Muslim , Jewish , and Christian cultures in Muslim Spain , in which Maimonides , Averroes , and others worked , the kharjas ( jarchas )
During the Reconquista , the epic poem Cantar de Mio Cid was written about a real manhis battles , conquests , and daily life . The Valencian chivalric romance Tirant lo Blanch written in Valencian language is also remarkable .
Other major plays from the medieval times were Mester de Juglara , Mester de Clereca , Coplas por la muerte de su padre or The Book of Good Love ( The Book of Good Love ) .
During the Renaissance the major plays are La Celestina and El Lazarillo de Tormes , while many religious literature was created with poets as Luis de Len , San Juan de la Cruz , Santa Teresa de Jess , etc .
The Baroque is the most important period for Spanish culture . We are in the times of the Spanish Empire . The famous Don Quixote by Miguel de Cervantes was written in this time . Other writers from the period are : Francisco de Quevedo , Lope de Vega , Pedro Caldern de la Barca or Tirso de Molina .
During the Age of Enlightenment we find names such as Leandro Fernndez de Moratn , Benito Jernimo Feijo , Gaspar Melchor de Jovellanos or Leandro Fernndez de Moratn .
During the Romanticism , Jos Zorrilla created one of the most emblematic figures in European literature in Don Juan Tenorio . Other writers from this period are Gustavo Adolfo Bcquer , Jos de Espronceda , Rosala de Castro or Mariano Jos de Larra .
Artists such as Benito Prez Galds , Emilia Pardo Bazn , Leopoldo Alas ( Clarn ) , Concepcin Arenal , Vicente Blasco Ibez and Menndez Pelayo created Realism ( arts ) artworks . Realism offered depictions of contemporary life and society 'as they were ' . In the spirit of general `` Realism '' , Realist authors opted for depictions of everyday and banal activities and experiences , instead of romanticised or stylised presentations .
The group that has become known as the Generation of 1898 was marked by the destruction of Spain 's fleet in Cuba by US gunboats in 1898 , which provoked a cultural crisis in Spain . The `` Disaster '' of 1898 led established writers to seek practical political , economic , and social solutions in essays grouped under the literary heading of Regeneracionismo . For a group of younger writers , among them Miguel de Unamuno , Po Baroja , and Jos Martnez Ruiz ( Azorn ) , the Disaster and its cultural repercussions inspired a deeper , more radical literary shift that affected both form and content . These writers , along with Ramn del Valle-Incln , Antonio Machado , Ramiro de Maeztu , and ngel Ganivet , came to be known as the Generation of '98 .
The Generation of 1914 or Novecentismo . The next supposed `` generation '' of Spanish writers following those of '98 already calls into question the value of such terminology . By the year 1914the year of the outbreak of the First World War and of the publication of the first major work of the generation 's leading voice , Jos Ortega y Gasseta number of slightly younger writers had established their own place within the Spanish cultural field .
Leading voices include the poet Juan Ramn Jimnez , the academics and essayists Ramn Menndez Pidal , Gregorio Maran , Manuel Azaa , Maria Zambrano , Eugeni d'Ors , Clara Campoamor and Ortega y Gasset , and the novelists Gabriel Mir , Ramn Prez de Ayala , and Ramn Gmez de la Serna . While still driven by the national and existential questions that obsessed the writers of '98 , they approached these topics with a greater sense of distance and objectivity . Salvador de Madariaga , another prominent intellectual and writer , was one of the founders of the College of Europe and the composer of the constitutive manifest of the Liberal International .
The Generation of 1927 , where poets Pedro Salinas , Jorge Guilln , Federico Garca Lorca , Vicente Aleixandre , Dmaso Alonso . All were scholars of their national literary heritage , again evidence of the impact of the calls of regeneracionistas and the Generation of 1898 for Spanish intelligence to turn at least partially inwards .
Spain 's two most preeminent writers in the second half of the 20th century were the Nobel Prize in Literature laureate Camilo Jos Cela and Miguel Delibes from Generation of '36 . Spain is one of the countries with the most laureates of the Nobel Prize in Literature , and including Latin American Nobel laureates , Spanish language literature ranks among the highest in numbers of laureates . The Spanish writers are : Jos Echegaray , Jacinto Benavente , Juan Ramn Jimnez , Vicente Aleixandre and Camilo Jos Cela . The Portuguese writer Jos Saramago , also awarded with the prize , lived for many years in Spain and spoke both Portuguese and Spanish . Saramago was also well known by his Iberism ideas .
The Generation of '50 are also known as the children of the civil war . Rosa Chacel , Gloria Fuertes , Jaime Gil de Biedma , Juan Goytisolo , Carmen Martn Gaite , Ana Mara Matute , Juan Mars , Blas de Otero , Gabriel Celaya , Antonio Gamoneda , Rafael Snchez Ferlosio or Ignacio Aldecoa .
Premio Planeta de Novela and Miguel de Cervantes Prize are the two main awards nowadays in Spanish literature .
=== Philosophy ===
Seneca the Elder was a philosopher residing in Spain during the time of the Roman Empire .
During the period of Muslim rule in Al-Andalus , Muslim , Jewish and Christian philosophies flourished , including the works of such philosophers such as Ibn Arabi , Averroes and Maimonides .
In the Middle Ages Ramon Llull flourished in Spain .
Humanist Luis Vives worked in Spain during the Renaissance , as did Francisco de Vitoria ( creator of the School of Salamanca and scholar on international law ) and Bartolom de las Casas .
The Age of Enlightenment in Spain arrived later and was less strong than in other European countries , but during the XIX century liberal ideas arrived in Spanish society . At the end of the century , socialist and libertarian ideas also flourished , with thinkers such as Francisco Pi y Margall , Ricardo Mella and Francisco Ferrer Guardia .
In the first half of the 20th century among the most prominent philosophers were Maria Zambrano and Jos Ortega y Gasset .
Contemporary philosophers include Fernando Savater and Adela Cortina , creator of the term aporophobia .
=== Art ===
Artists from Spain have been highly influential in the development of various European and Hispanic America art movement . Due to historical , geographical and generational diversity , Spanish art has known a great number of influences . The Mediterranean heritage with Greco-Roman and some Moorish and influences in Spain , especially in Andalusia , is still evident today . European influences include Italy , Germany and France , especially during the Renaissance , Baroque and Neoclassicism periods . There are many other autochthonous styles such as the Pre-Romanesque art and architecture , Herrerian architecture or the Isabelline Gothic .
During the Golden Age painters working in Spain included El Greco , Jos de Ribera , Bartolom Esteban Murillo and Francisco Zurbarn . Also in the Baroque period , Diego Velzquez created some of the most famous Spanish portraits , such as Las Meninas and Las Hilanderas ( Velzquez ) .
Francisco Goya painted during a historical period that includes the Peninsular War , the fights between liberals and absolutists , and the rise of contemporary nations-states .
Joaqun Sorolla is a well-known modern impressionist painter and there are many important Spanish painters belonging to the modernism art movement , including Pablo Picasso , Salvador Dal , Juan Gris and Joan Mir .
=== Sculpture ===
The Plateresque style extended from beginnings of the 16th century until the last third of the century and its stylistic influence pervaded the works of all great Spanish artists of the time . Alonso Berruguete ( Valladolid School ) is called the `` Prince of Spanish sculpture '' . His main works were the upper stalls of the choir of the Cathedral of Toledo , the tomb of Cardinal Tavera in the same Cathedral , and the altarpiece of the Visitation in the church of Santa rsula in the same locality . Other notable sculptors were Bartolom Ordez , Diego de Silo , Juan de Juni and Dami Forment .
There were two Schools of special flair and talent : the Sevillian school of sculpture , to which Juan Martnez Montas belonged , whose most celebrated works are the Crucifix in the Cathedral of Seville , another in Vergara , and a Saint John ; and the Granadan school of sculpture , to which Alonso Cano belonged , to whom an Immaculate Conception and a Virgin of Rosary , are attributed .
Other notable Andalusian Baroque sculptors were Pedro de Mena , Pedro Roldn and his daughter Luisa Roldn , Juan de Mesa and Pedro Duque Cornejo . In the 20th century the most important Spanish sculptors were Julio Gonzlez ( sculptor ) , Pablo Gargallo , Eduardo Chillida , and Pablo Serrano .
=== Cinema ===
Spanish cinema has achieved major international success including Academy Award for recent films such as Pan 's Labyrinth and Volver . In the long history of Spanish cinema , the great filmmaker Luis Buuel was the first to achieve world recognition , followed by Pedro Almodvar in the 1980s ( La Movida Madrilea ) . Mario Camus and Pilar Mir worked together in Curro Jimnez .
Spanish cinema has also seen international success over the years with films by directors like Segundo de Chomn , Florin Rey , Luis Garca Berlanga , Carlos Saura , Julio Medem , Isabel Coixet , Alejandro Amenbar , Icar Bollan and brothers David Trueba and Fernando Trueba .
Actresses Sara Montiel and Penlope Cruz or actor Antonio Banderas are among those who have become Cinema in the United States stars .
International Film Festivals of Seminci and San Sebastin International Film Festival are the oldest and more relevant in Spain .
=== Architecture ===
Due to its historical and geographical diversity , Spanish architecture has drawn from a host of influences . An important provincial city founded by the Romans and with an extensive Roman era infrastructure , Crdoba , Spain became the cultural capital , including fine Arabic style architecture , during the time of the Islamic Umayyad dynasty . Later Arab style architecture continued to be developed under successive Islamic dynasties , ending with the Nasrid dynasty , which built its famed palace complex in Granada .
Simultaneously , the Christian kingdoms gradually emerged and developed their own styles ; developing a pre-Romanesque style when for a while isolated from contemporary mainstream European architectural influences during the earlier Middle Ages , they later integrated the Romanesque architecture and Gothic architecture streams . There was then an extraordinary flowering of the Gothic style that resulted in numerous instances being built throughout the entire territory . The Mudjar style , from the 12th to 17th centuries , was developed by introducing Arab style motifs , patterns and elements into European architecture .
The arrival of Modernism in the academic arena produced much of the architecture of the 20th century . An influential style centred in Barcelona , known as modernisme , produced a number of important architects , of which Gaud is one . The International Style ( architecture ) was led by groups like GATEPAC . Spain is currently experiencing a revolution in contemporary architecture and : Category : Spanish architects like Rafael Moneo , Santiago Calatrava , Ricardo Bofill as well as many others have gained worldwide renown .
=== Music and dance ===
Spanish music is often considered abroad to be synonymous with flamenco , a West Andalusian musical genre , which , contrary to popular belief , is not widespread outside that region . Various regional styles of folk music abound in Aragon , Catalonia , Valencia , Castile , the Basque Country , Galicia , Cantabria and Asturias . Pop , rock , hip hop and heavy metal are also popular .
In the field of classical music , Spain has produced a number of noted composers such as Isaac Albniz , Manuel de Falla and Enrique Granados and singers and performers such as Plcido Domingo , Jos Carreras , Montserrat Caball , Alicia de Larrocha , Alfredo Kraus , Pablo Casals , Ricardo Vies , Jos Iturbi , Pablo de Sarasate , Jordi Savall and Teresa Berganza . In Spain there are over forty professional orchestras , including the Barcelona Symphony and Catalonia National Orchestra , Orquesta Nacional de Espaa and the Orquesta Sinfnica de Madrid . Major opera houses include the Teatro Real , the Gran Teatre del Liceu , Teatro Arriaga and the El Palau de les Arts Reina Sofa .
Thousands of music fans also travel to Spain each year for internationally recognised summer music festivals Snar which often features the top up and coming pop and techno acts , and Festival Internacional de Benicssim which tends to feature alternative rock and dance acts . Both festivals mark Spain as an international music presence and reflect the tastes of young people in the country .
Vitoria-Gasteiz jazz festival is one of the main ones on its genre .
The most popular traditional musical instrument , the guitar , originated in Spain . Typical of the north are the traditional bag pipers or gaita ( bagpipe ) , mainly in Asturias and Galicia .
=== Cuisine ===
Spanish cuisine consists of a great variety of dishes which stem from differences in geography , culture and climate . It is heavily influenced by seafood available from the waters that surround the country , and reflects the country 's deep Mediterranean roots . Spain 's extensive history with many cultural influences has led to a unique cuisine . In particular , three main divisions are easily identified :
Mediterranean Spain  all such coastal regions , from Catalonia to Andalusia  heavy use of seafood , such as pescato frito ( fried fish ) ; several cold soups like gazpacho ; and many rice-based dishes like paella from Valencia and arrs negre ( black rice ) from Catalonia .
Inner Spain  Castile  hot , thick soups such as the bread and garlic-based Castilian soup , along with substantial stews such as cocido madrileo . Food is traditionally conserved by salting , such as Spanish ham , or immersed in olive oil , such as Manchego cheese .
Atlantic Spain  the whole Northern coast , including Asturian cuisine , Basque cuisine , Cantabrian cuisine and Galician cuisine  vegetable and fish-based stews like caldo gallego and marmitako . Also , the lightly cured Lacn Gallego ham . The best known cuisine of the northern countries often rely on ocean seafood , as in the Basque-style cod , albacore or anchovy or the Galician octopus-based polbo  feira and shellfish dishes .
=== Sport ===
While varieties of football have been played in Spain as far back as Roman times , sport in Spain has been dominated by football since the early 20th century . Real Madrid C.F . and FC Barcelona are two of the most successful football clubs in the world . Spain national football team The country 's national football team won the UEFA European Football Championship in 1964 , 2008 and 2012 and the FIFA World Cup in 2010 FIFA World Cup , and is the first team ever to win three back-to-back major international tournaments .
Basketball , tennis , cycling , team handball , Spain national futsal team , motorcycling and , lately , Formula One also can boast of Spanish champions . Today , Spain is a major world sports powerhouse , especially since the 1992 Summer Olympics that were hosted in Barcelona , which stimulated a great deal of interest in sports in the country . The tourism industry has led to an improvement in sports infrastructure , especially for water sports , golf and skiing . In their respective regions , the traditional games of Basque pelota and Valencian pilota both are popular .
=== Public holidays and festivals ===
Public holidays celebrated in Spain include a mix of religious ( Roman Catholic ) , national and local observances . Each municipality is allowed to declare a maximum of 14 public holidays per year ; up to nine of these are chosen by the national government and at least two are chosen locally . National Day of Spain Spain 's National Day ( Fiesta Nacional de Espaa ) is celebrated on 12 October , the anniversary of the Exploration of North America and commemorate Our Lady of the Pillar feast , patroness of Aragon and throughout Spain .
There are many festivals and festivities in Spain . Some of them are known worldwide , and millions of tourits from all over the world go to Spain annually to experience one of these festivals . One of the most famous is San Fermn , in Pamplona . While its most famous event is the encierro , or the running of the bulls , which happens at 8:00 ; am from 7 July to 14 July , the seven days-long celebration involves many other traditional and folkloric events . The events were central to the plot of The Sun Also Rises , by Ernest Hemingway , which brought it to the general attention of English-speaking people . As the result , it has become one of the most internationally renowned fiestas in Spain , with over 1,000,000 people attending every year .
Other festivals include : La Tomatina tomato festival in Buol , Valencian Community , the carnivals in the Canary Islands , the Falles in Valencia or the Holy Week in Andalusia and Castile and Len .
== See also ==
* Outline of Spain
* List of World Heritage Sites in Spain
== Notes ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Raymond Carr Carr , Raymond , ed . Spain : a history . Oxford University Press , USA , 2000.
*
* Callaghan O.F Joseph . A History of Medieval Spain Cornell University Press 1983
== External links ==
* Spain . The World Factbook . Central Intelligence Agency .
* Spain from UCB Libraries GovPubs
*
* Spain from the BBC News
* Key Development Forecasts for Spain from International Futures
; Government
* E-Government portal for Spain
; Maps
*
*
; Tourism
* Official tourism portal for Spain
Category : Spain
Category : Countries in Europe
Category : Iberian Peninsula
Category : Member states of NATO
Category : Member states of the Council of Europe
Category : Member states of the European Union
Category : Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean
Category : Member states of the United Nations
Category : Southern European countries
Category : Southwestern European countries
Category : Spanish monarchy
Category : Spanish-speaking countries and territories
Category : Countries in Africa
Category : North African countries
Category : States and territories established in 1479
Category : States and territories established in 1715
Category : Transcontinental countries <article_end> <article_start>  
Ireland ( ; ire ; Ulster Scots dialect Ulster-Scots : Airlann ) is an island in the North Atlantic Ocean . It is separated from Great Britain to its east by the North Channel ( Great Britain and Ireland ) , the Irish Sea , and St George 's Channel . Ireland is the List of islands of the British Isles second-largest island of the British Isles , the List of European islands by area third-largest in Europe , and the List of islands by area twentieth-largest on Earth .
Geopolitically , Ireland is divided between the Republic of Ireland ( officially Names of the Irish state ) , which covers five-sixths of the island , and Northern Ireland , which is part of the United Kingdom . In 2011 , the Irish population analysis was about 6.6 ; million , ranking it the List of European islands by population second-most populous island in Europe after Great Britain . As of 2016 , 4.8 ; million live in the Republic of Ireland , and 1.8 ; million live in Northern Ireland .
The geography of Ireland comprises relatively low-lying mountains surrounding a central plain , with Rivers of Ireland extending inland . Its lush vegetation is a product of its mild but changeable climate which is free of extremes in temperature . Much of Ireland was woodland until the end of the Middle Ages . Today , woodland makes up about 10 % of the island , compared with a European average of over 33 % , and most of it is non-native conifer plantations . There are twenty-six extant land mammal species native to Ireland . The Climate of Ireland is influenced by the Atlantic Ocean and thus very moderate , and winters are milder than expected for such a northerly area , although summers are cooler than those in continental Europe . Rainfall and cloud cover are abundant .
The earliest evidence of human presence in Ireland is dated at 10,500 BC . Gaelic Ireland had emerged by the 1st century AD . The island was Christianised from the 5th century onward . Following the 12th century Norman invasion of Ireland Anglo-Norman invasion , Kingdom of England claimed sovereignty . However , English rule did not extend over the whole island until the 16th17th century Tudor conquest of Ireland , which led to Plantation of Ireland . In the 1690s , a system of Protestant Ascendancy was designed to materially disadvantage the Catholic Church majority and Protestant dissenters , and was extended during the 18th century . With the Acts of Union 1800 in 1801 , Ireland became Countries of the United Kingdom the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland . A Irish War of Independence in the early 20th century was followed by the Partition of Ireland , creating the Irish Free State , which became increasingly sovereign over the following decades , and Northern Ireland , which remained a part of the United Kingdom . Northern Ireland saw much The Troubles . This subsided following Good Friday Agreement in 1998 . In 1973 the Republic of Ireland joined the European Economic Community while the United Kingdom , and Northern Ireland , as part of it , did the same .
Irish culture has had a significant influence on other cultures , especially in the field of Irish literature . Alongside mainstream Western culture , a strong indigenous culture exists , as expressed through Gaelic games , Irish music and the Irish language . The island 's culture shares many features with that of Great Britain , including the English language , and sports such as association football , Rugby football , [ racing ] , and golf .
==Etymology==
The names Ireland and ire derive from Old Irish riu , a goddess in Irish mythology first recorded in the ninth century . The etymology of riu is disputed but may derive from the Proto-Indo-European root * , referring to flowing water .
==History==
===Prehistoric Ireland===
During the last glacial period , and until about 10,000 BC , most of Ireland was periodically covered in ice . Sea levels were lower and Ireland , like Great Britain , formed part of continental Europe . By 16,000 BC , rising sea levels caused by ice melting caused Ireland to become separated from Great Britain . Later , around 6000 BC , Great Britain became separated from continental Europe . The earliest evidence of human presence in Ireland is dated at 10,500 BC , demonstrated by a butchered bear bone found in a cave in County Clare . By about 8000 BC , more sustained occupation of the island has been shown , with evidence for Mesolithic communities around the island .
Some time before 4000 ; BC , Neolithic settlers introduced cereal cultivars , domesticated animals such as cattle and sheep , large timber buildings , and stone monuments . The earliest evidence for farming in Ireland or Great Britain is from Ferriter 's Cove , County Kerry , where a flint knife , cattle bones and a sheep 's tooth were Radiocarbon dating carbon-dated to c. ; 4350 ; BC . Field systems were developed in different parts of Ireland , including at the Cide Fields , that has been preserved beneath a blanket of peat in present-day Tyrawley . An extensive field system , arguably the oldest in the world , consisted of small divisions separated by dry-stone walls . The fields were farmed for several centuries between 3500 BC and 3000 BC . Wheat and barley were the principal crops .
The Bronze Age ; began around 2500 BC , with technology changing people 's everyday lives during this period through innovations such as the wheel ; harnessing oxen ; weaving ; brewing alcohol ( drug ) ; and skilful metalworking , which produced new weapons and tools , along with fine gold decoration and jewellery , such as brooches and torcs .
====Emergence of Celtic Ireland====
How and when the island became Celtic has been debated for close to a century , with the migrations of the Celts being one of the more enduring themes of archaeological and linguistic studies . The most recent genetic research strongly associates the spread of Indo-European languages ( including Celtic ) through Western Europe with a people bringing a composite Beaker culture , with its arrival in Britain and Ireland dated to around the middle of the third millennium ; BC . According to John T. Koch and others , Ireland in the Late Bronze Age was part of a maritime trading-network culture called the Atlantic Bronze Age that also included Britain , western France and Iberia , and that this is where Celtic languages developed . This contrasts with the traditional view that their origin lies in mainland Europe with the Hallstatt culture .
The long-standing traditional view is that the Celtic language , Ogham script and culture were brought to Ireland by waves of invading or migrating Celts from mainland Europe . This theory draws on the Lebor Gabla renn , a medieval Christian pseudo-history of Ireland , along with the presence of Celtic culture , language and artifacts found in Ireland such as Celtic bronze spears , shields , torcs and other finely crafted Celtic associated possessions . The theory holds that there were four separate Celtic invasions of Ireland . The Priteni were said to be the first , followed by the Belgae from northern Gaul and Britain . Later , Laighin tribes from Armorica ( present-day Brittany ) were said to have invaded Ireland and Britain more or less simultaneously . Lastly , the Milesians ( Irish ) ( Gaels ) were said to have reached Ireland from either northern Iberia or southern Gaul . It was claimed that a second wave named the Euerni , belonging to the Belgae people of northern Gaul , began arriving about the sixth century BC . They were said to have given their name to the island .
The theory was advanced in part because of lack of archaeological evidence for large-scale Celtic immigration , though it is accepted that such movements are notoriously difficult to identify . Historical linguists are skeptical that this method alone could account for the absorption of Celtic language , with some saying that an assumed processional view of Celtic linguistic formation is 'an especially hazardous exercise ' . Genetic lineage investigation into the area of Celtic migration to Ireland has led to findings that showed no significant differences in mitochondrial DNA between Ireland and large areas of continental Europe , in contrast to parts of the Y-chromosome pattern . When taking both into account , a study concluded that modern Celtic speakers in Ireland could be thought of as European `` Atlantic Celts '' showing a shared ancestry throughout the Atlantic zone from northern Iberia to western Scandinavia rather than substantially central European .
In 2012 , research showed that occurrence of genetic markers for the earliest farmers was almost eliminated by Beaker-culture immigrants : they carried what was then a new Y-chromosome R1b marker , believed to have originated in Iberia about 2500 BC . The prevalence amongst modern Irish men of this mutation is a remarkable 84 % , the highest in the world , and closely matched in other populations along the Atlantic fringes down to Spain . A similar genetic replacement happened with lineages in mitochondrial DNA . This conclusion is supported by recent research carried out by the geneticist David Reich ( geneticist ) , who says :  British and Irish skeletons from the Bronze Age that followed the Beaker period had at most 10 percent ancestry from the first farmers of these islands , with other 90 percent from people like those associated with the Bell Beaker culture in the Netherlands.  He suggests that it was Beaker users who introduced an Indo-European language , represented here by Celtic ( i.e . a new language and culture introduced directly by migration and genetic replacement ) .
===Late antiquity and early medieval times===
The earliest written records of Ireland come from classical Greco-Roman world Greco-Roman geographers . Ptolemy in his Almagest refers to Ireland as Mikra Brettania ( `` Little Britain '' ) , in contrast to the larger island , which he called Megale Brettania ( `` Great Britain '' ) . In his later work , Geography ( Ptolemy ) , Ptolemy refers to Ireland as Hibernia and to Great Britain as Albion . These 'new ' names were likely to have been the local names for the islands at the time . The earlier names , Exonym and endonym , were likely to have been coined before direct contact with local peoples was made .
The Ancient Romans referred to Ireland by this name too in its Latinisation of names form , Hibernia , or Scotia . Ptolemy records sixteen nations inhabiting every part of Ireland in 100 AD . The relationship between the Roman Empire and the kingdoms of ancient Ireland is unclear . However , a number of finds of Roman coins have been made , for example at the Iron Age settlement of Freestone Hill near Gowran and Newgrange .
Ireland continued as a patchwork of rival kingdoms ; however , beginning in the 7th century , a concept of national kingship gradually became articulated through the concept of a High King of Ireland . Medieval Irish literature portrays an almost unbroken sequence of high kings stretching back thousands of years , but modern historians believe the scheme was constructed in the 8th century to justify the status of powerful political groupings by projecting the origins of their rule into the remote past .
All of the Irish kingdoms had their own kings but were nominally subject to the high king . The high king was drawn from the ranks of the provincial kings and ruled also the royal kingdom of Meath , with a ceremonial capital at the Hill of Tara . The concept did not become a political reality until the Viking Age # Ireland and even then was not a consistent one . Ireland did have a culturally unifying rule of law : the early written judicial system , the Brehon Laws , administered by a professional class of jurists known as the brehons .
The Chronicle of Ireland records that in 431 , Bishop Palladius ( bishop of Ireland ) arrived in Ireland on a mission from Pope Celestine I to minister to the Irish `` already believing in Christ '' . The same chronicle records that Saint Patrick , Ireland 's best known Patron saints of places , arrived the following year . There is continued debate over the missions of Palladius and Patrick , but the consensus is that they both took place and that the older druid tradition collapsed in the face of the new religion . Irish Christian scholars excelled in the study of Latin and Greek learning and Christian theology . In the monastic culture that followed the Christianisation of Ireland , Latin and Greek learning was preserved in Ireland during the Middle Ages in contrast to elsewhere in Western Europe , where the Early Middle Ages followed the Fall of the Western Roman Empire .
The arts of Illuminated manuscript , metalworking and sculpture flourished and produced treasures such as the Book of Kells , ornate jewellery and the many carved stone crosses that still dot the island today . A mission founded in 563 on Iona by the Irish monk Saint Columba began Hiberno-Scottish mission work that spread Celtic Christianity and learning to Scotland , Anglo-Saxon England and the Frankish Empire on continental Europe after the fall of Rome . These missions continued until the late Middle Ages , establishing monasteries and centres of learning , producing scholars such as Sedulius Scottus and Johannes Eriugena and exerting much influence in Europe .
From the 9th century , waves of Viking raiders plundered Irish monasteries and towns . These raids added to a pattern of raiding and endemic warfare that was already deep-seated in Ireland . The Vikings were involved in establishing most of the major coastal settlements in Ireland : Dublin , Limerick , County Cork , Wexford , Waterford , as well as other smaller settlements .
===Norman and English invasions===
On 1 May 1169 , an expedition of Wales-Norman people knights , with an army of about 600 men , landed at Bannow in present-day County Wexford . It was led by Richard de Clare , 2nd Earl of Pembroke , known as 'Strongbow ' owing to his prowess as an archer . The invasion , which coincided with a period of renewed Norman expansion , was at the invitation of Diarmait Mac Murchada , Kings of Leinster .
In 1166 , Mac Murrough had fled to Anjou , France , following a war involving Tighearnn Ua Ruairc , of Breifne , and sought the assistance of the Angevin Empire King King Henry II of England , in recapturing his kingdom . In 1171 , Henry arrived in Ireland in order to review the general progress of the expedition . He wanted to re-exert royal authority over the invasion which was expanding beyond his control . Henry successfully re-imposed his authority over Strongbow and the Cambro-Norman warlords and persuaded many of the Irish kings to accept him as their overlord , an arrangement confirmed in the 1175 Treaty of Windsor 1175.
The invasion was legitimised by the provisions of the Papal Bull Laudabiliter , issued by an Englishman , Pope Adrian IV , in 1155 . The bull encouraged Henry to take control in Ireland in order to oversee the financial and administrative reorganisation of the Celtic Church and its integration into the Roman Church system . Some restructuring had already begun at the ecclesiastical level following the Synod of Kells in 1152 . There has been significant controversy regarding the authenticity of Laudabiliter , and there is no general agreement as to whether the bull was genuine or a forgery .
In 1172 , Pope Pope Alexander III further encouraged Henry to advance the integration of the Irish Church with Rome . Henry was authorised to impose a tithe of one penny per hearth as an annual contribution . This church levy , called Peter 's Pence , is extant in Ireland as a voluntary donation . In turn , Henry accepted the title of Lord of Ireland which Henry conferred on his younger son , John Lackland , in 1185 . This defined the Irish state as the Lordship of Ireland . When Henry 's successor died unexpectedly in 1199 , John of England inherited the crown of England and retained the Lordship of Ireland .
Over the century that followed , Norman feudal law gradually replaced the Gaelic Brehon Law so that by the late 13th century the Hiberno-Norman Norman-Irish had established a feudal system throughout much of Ireland . Norman settlements were characterised by the establishment of baronies , manors , towns and the seeds of the modern county system . A version of the Magna Carta ( the Great Charter of Ireland ) , substituting Dublin for London and the Irish Church for , the English church at the time , the Catholic Church , was published in 1216 and the Parliament of Ireland was founded in 1297.
From the mid-14th century , after the Black Death , Norman settlements in Ireland went into a period of decline . The Norman rulers and the Gaelic Irish elites intermarried and the areas under Norman rule became Gaelicisation . In some parts , a hybrid Hiberno-Norman culture emerged . In response , the Parliament of Ireland # Middle Ages passed the Statutes of Kilkenny in 1367 . These were a set of laws designed to prevent the assimilation of the Normans into Irish society by requiring English subjects in Ireland to speak English , follow English customs and abide by English law .
By the end of the 15th century , central English authority in Ireland had all but disappeared , and a renewed Irish culture and language , albeit with Norman influences , was dominant again . English Crown control remained relatively unshaken in an amorphous foothold around Dublin known as The Pale , and under the provisions of Poynings ' Law ( on certification of acts ) Poynings ' Law of 1494 , the Irish Parliamentary legislation was subject to the approval of the English Privy Council .
===The Kingdom of Ireland===
The title of King of Ireland was re-created in 1542 by Henry VIII , the then King of England , of the Tudor dynasty . English rule was reinforced and expanded in Ireland during the latter part of the 16th century , leading to the Tudor conquest of Ireland . A near-complete conquest was achieved by the turn of the 17th century , following the Nine Years ' War ( Ireland ) Nine Years ' War and the Flight of the Earls .
This control was consolidated during the wars and conflicts of the 17th century , including the English and Scottish colonisation in the Plantations of Ireland , the Wars of the Three Kingdoms and the Williamite War in Ireland . Irish losses during the Wars of the Three Kingdoms ( which , in Ireland , included the Irish Confederacy and the Cromwellian conquest of Ireland ) are estimated to include 20,000 battlefield casualties . 200,000 civilians are estimated to have died as a result of a combination of war-related famine , displacement , guerrilla activity and pestilence throughout the war . A further 50,000 were sent into indentured servitude in the West Indies . Physician-general William Petty estimated that 504,000 Catholic Irish and 112,000 Protestant settlers died , and 100,000 people were transported , as a result of the war . If a prewar population of 1.5 million is assumed , this would mean that the population was reduced by almost half .
The religious struggles of the 17th century left a deep sectarian division in Ireland . Religious allegiance now determined the perception in law of loyalty to the Irish King and Parliament . After the passing of Test Act # 1672 Act , and the victory of the forces of the dual monarchy of William III of England and Mary II of England over the Jacobitism , Roman Catholics and nonconforming Protestant Dissenters were barred from sitting as members in the Parliament of Ireland . Under the emerging Penal Laws ( Ireland ) , Irish Roman Catholics and Dissenters were increasingly deprived of various and sundry civil rights even to the ownership of hereditary property . Additional regressive punitive legislation followed in 1703 , 1709 and 1728 . This completed a comprehensive systemic effort to materially disadvantage Roman Catholics and Protestant Dissenters , while enriching a new ruling class of Anglican conformists . The new Anglo-Irish ruling class became known as the Protestant Ascendancy .
The `` Irish Famine ( 17401741 ) # Cause '' struck Ireland and the rest of Europe between December 1739 and September 1741 , after a decade of relatively mild winters . The winters destroyed stored crops of potatoes and other staples , and the poor summers severely damaged harvests . This resulted in the Irish Famine ( 17401741 ) . An estimated 250,000 people ( about one in eight of the population ) died from the ensuing pestilence and disease . The Irish government halted export of corn and kept the army in quarters but did little more . Local gentry and charitable organisations provided relief but could do little to prevent the ensuing mortality .
In the aftermath of the famine , an increase in industrial production and a surge in trade brought a succession of construction booms . The population soared in the latter part of this century and the Georgian architecture Ireland was built . In 1782 , Poynings ' Law ( on certification of acts ) Poynings ' Law was repealed , giving Ireland legislative independence from Great Britain for the first time since 1495 . The British government , however , still retained the right to nominate the government of Ireland without the consent of the Irish parliament .
===Union with Great Britain===
In 1798 , members of the Protestant Dissenter tradition ( mainly Presbyterianism ) made common cause with Roman Catholics in a republican rebellion inspired and led by the Society of United Irishmen , with the aim of creating an independent Ireland . Despite assistance from France the Irish Rebellion of 1798 was put down by British and Irish government and yeomanry forces . In 1800 , the British and Irish parliaments both passed Acts of Union 1800 that , with effect from 1 January 1801 , merged the Kingdom of Ireland and the Kingdom of Great Britain to create a United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland .
The passage of the Act in the Irish Parliament was ultimately achieved with substantial majorities , having failed on the first attempt in 1799 . According to contemporary documents and historical analysis , this was achieved through a considerable degree of bribery , with funding provided by the British Secret Service Office , and the awarding of peerages , places and honours to secure votes . Thus , the parliament in Ireland was abolished and replaced by a Parliament of the United Kingdom in London , though resistance remained , as evidenced by Robert Emmet 's failed Irish Rebellion of 1803.
Aside from the development of the linen industry , Ireland was largely passed over by the industrial revolution , partly because it lacked coal and iron resources and partly because of the impact of the sudden union with the structurally superior economy of England , which saw Ireland as a source of agricultural produce and capital .
The Great Famine ( Ireland ) of 18451851 devastated Ireland , as in those years Ireland 's population fell by one-third . More than one million people died from starvation and disease , with an additional million people emigrating during the famine , mostly to the United States and Canada . In the century that followed , an economic depression caused by the famine resulted in a further million people emigrating . By the end of the decade , half of all immigration to the United States was from Ireland . The period of civil unrest that followed until the end of the 19th century is referred to as the Land War . Mass emigration became deeply entrenched and the population continued to decline until the mid-20th century . Immediately prior to the famine the population was recorded as 8.2 million by the United Kingdom census , 1841 . The population has never returned to this level since . The population continued to fall until 1961 ; County Leitrim was the final Irish county to record a population increase post-famine , in 2006.
The 19th and early 20th centuries saw the rise of modern Irish nationalism , primarily among the Roman Catholic population . The pre-eminent Irish political figure after the Union was Daniel O'Connell . He was elected as Member of Parliament for Ennis ( UK Parliament constituency ) in a surprise result and despite being unable to take his seat The Test Act . O'Connell spearheaded a vigorous campaign that was taken up by the Prime Minister , the Irish-born soldier and statesman , the Arthur Wellesley , 1st Duke of Wellington . Steering the Roman Catholic Relief Act 1829 through Parliament , aided by future prime minister Robert Peel , Wellington prevailed upon a reluctant George IV of the United Kingdom to sign the Bill and proclaim it into law . George III of the United Kingdom George 's father had opposed the plan of the earlier Prime Minister , William Pitt the Younger , to introduce such a bill following the Union of 1801 , fearing Catholic Emancipation to be in conflict with the Act of Settlement 1701.
Daniel O'Connell led a subsequent campaign , for the repeal of the Act of Union , which failed . Later in the century , Charles Stewart Parnell and others campaigned for autonomy within the Union , or `` Irish Home Rule Bills '' . Unionists , especially those located in Ulster , were strongly opposed to Home Rule , which they thought would be dominated by Catholic interests . After several attempts to pass a Home Rule bill through parliament , it looked certain that one would finally pass in 1914 . To prevent this from happening , the Ulster Volunteers were formed in 1913 under the leadership of Edward Carson .
Their formation was followed in 1914 by the establishment of the Irish Volunteers , whose aim was to ensure that the Third Home Rule Act was passed . The Act was passed but with the `` temporary '' exclusion of the six counties of Ulster that would become Northern Ireland . Before it could be implemented , however , the Act was suspended for the duration of the World War I . The Irish Volunteers split into two groups . The majority , approximately 175,000 in number , under John Redmond , took the name National Volunteers and supported Ireland and World War I in the war . A minority , approximately 13,000 , retained the Irish Volunteers ' name and opposed Ireland 's involvement in the war .
The Easter Rising of 1916 was carried out by the latter group together with a smaller socialist militia , the Irish Citizen Army . The British response , executing fifteen leaders of the Rising over a period of ten days and imprisoning or interning more than a thousand people , turned the mood of the country in favour of the rebels . Support for Physical force Irish republicanism further due to the ongoing war in Europe , as well as the Conscription Crisis of 1918.
The pro-independence republican party , Sinn Fin , received overwhelming endorsement in the 1918 Irish general election , and in 1919 proclaimed an Irish Republic , setting up its own parliament ( First Dil ) and government . Simultaneously the Volunteers , which became known as the Irish Republican Army ( IRA ) , launched a Irish War of Independence three-year guerrilla war , which ended in a truce in July 1921 ( although violence continued until June 1922 , mostly in Northern Ireland ) .
===Partition===
In December 1921 , the Anglo-Irish Treaty was concluded between the British government and representatives of the Second Dil . It gave Ireland complete independence in its home affairs and practical independence for foreign policy , but an opt-out clause allowed Northern Ireland to remain within the United Kingdom , which ( as expected ) it immediately exercised . Additionally , Members of the Third Dil were required to swear Oath of Allegiance ( Ireland ) and make a statement of faithfulness to the King . Disagreements over these provisions led to a split in the nationalist movement and a subsequent Irish Civil War between the new government of the Irish Free State and those opposed to the treaty , led by amon de Valera . The civil war officially ended in May 1923 when de Valera issued a cease-fire order .
====Independence====
During its first decade , the newly formed Irish Free State was governed by the victors of the civil war . When de Valera achieved power , he took advantage of the Statute of Westminster 1931 and Edward VIII abdication crisis to build upon inroads to greater sovereignty made by the previous government . The oath was abolished and in 1937 a new constitution was adopted . This completed a process of gradual separation from the British Empire that governments had pursued since independence . However , it was not until 1949 that the state was declared , officially , to be the Republic of Ireland .
Irish neutrality during The Emergency ( Ireland ) , but offered Irish neutrality during World War II , particularly in the potential defence of Northern Ireland . Despite their country 's neutrality , approximately 50,000 volunteers from independent Ireland joined the British forces during the war , four being awarded Victoria Crosses .
The Abwehr was also active in Ireland . Its operations ended in September 1941 when Garda Sochna made arrests based on surveillance carried out on the key diplomatic legations in Dublin . To the authorities , counterintelligence was a fundamental line of defence . With a regular army of only slightly over seven thousand men at the start of the war , and with limited supplies of modern weapons , the state would have had great difficulty in defending itself from invasion from either side in the conflict .
Large-scale emigration marked most of the post-WWII period ( particularly during the 1950s and 1980s ) , but beginning in 1987 the economy improved , and the 1990s saw the beginning of substantial economic growth . This period of growth became known as the Celtic Tiger . The Republic 's real GDP grew by an average of 9.6 % per annum between 1995 and 1999 , in which year the Republic joined the euro . In 2000 , it was the sixth-richest country in the world in terms of GDP per capita . Historian R. F. Foster ( historian ) R. F. Foster argues the cause was a combination of a new sense of initiative and the entry of American corporations . He concludes the chief factors were low taxation , pro-business regulatory policies , and a young , tech-savvy workforce . For many multinationals , the decision to do business in Ireland was made easier still by generous incentives from the IDA Ireland . In addition European Union membership was helpful , giving the country lucrative access to markets that it had previously reached only through the United Kingdom , and pumping huge subsidies and investment capital into the Irish economy .
Modernisation brought secularisation in its wake . The traditionally high levels of religiosity have sharply declined . Foster points to three factors : Irish feminism , largely imported from America with liberal stances on contraception , abortion , and divorce undermined the authority of bishops and priests . Second , the mishandling of the pedophile scandals humiliated the Church , whose bishops seemed less concerned with the victims and more concerned with covering up for errant priests . Third , prosperity brought hedonism and materialism that undercut the ideals of saintly poverty .
The Post-2008 Irish economic downturn that began in 2008 dramatically ended this period of boom . GDP fell by 3 % in 2008 and by 7.1 % in 2009 , the worst year since records began ( although earnings by foreign-owned businesses continued to grow ) . The state has since experienced deep recession , with unemployment , which doubled during 2009 , remaining above 14 % in 2012.
====Northern Ireland====
Northern Ireland resulted from the division of the United Kingdom by the Government of Ireland Act 1920 , and until 1972 was a self-governing jurisdiction within the United Kingdom with its own parliament and prime minister . Northern Ireland , as part of the United Kingdom , was not neutral during the Second World War , and Belfast Blitz in 1941 . Conscription was not extended to Northern Ireland , and roughly an equal number volunteered from Northern Ireland as volunteered from the south .
Although Northern Ireland was largely spared the strife of the civil war , in decades that followed partition there were sporadic episodes of inter-communal violence . Nationalists , mainly Roman Catholic , wanted to unite Ireland as an independent republic , whereas unionists , mainly Protestant , wanted Northern Ireland to remain in the United Kingdom . The Protestant and Catholic communities in Northern Ireland voted largely along sectarian lines , meaning that the government of Northern Ireland ( elected by Plurality electoral system `` first-past-the-post '' from 1929 ) was controlled by the Ulster Unionist Party . Over time , the minority Catholic community felt increasingly alienated with further disaffection fuelled by practices such as gerrymandering and discrimination in housing and employment .
In the late 1960s , nationalist grievances were aired publicly in mass civil rights protests , which were often confronted by Ulster loyalism counter-protests . The government 's reaction to confrontations was seen to be one-sided and heavy-handed in favour of unionists . Law and order broke down as unrest and inter-communal violence increased . The Northern Ireland government requested the British Army to aid the police and protect the Irish Nationalist population . In 1969 , the paramilitary Provisional Irish Republican Army , which favoured the creation of a united Ireland , emerged from a split in the Irish Republican Army ( 19221969 ) and began a campaign against what it called the `` British occupation of the six counties '' .
Other groups , on both the unionist side and the nationalist side , participated in violence and a period known as the Troubles began . Over 3,600 deaths resulted over the subsequent three decades of conflict . Owing to the civil unrest during the Troubles , the British government suspended home rule in 1972 and imposed Direct rule over Northern Ireland . There were several unsuccessful attempts to end the Troubles politically , such as the Sunningdale Agreement of 1973 . In 1998 , following a ceasefire by the Provisional IRA and multi-party talks , the Good Friday Agreement was concluded as a treaty between the British and Irish governments , annexing the text agreed in the multi-party talks .
The substance of the Agreement ( formally referred to as the Belfast Agreement ) was later endorsed by referendums in both parts of Ireland . The Agreement restored self-government to Northern Ireland on the basis of power-sharing in a regional Northern Ireland Executive drawn from the major parties in a new Northern Ireland Assembly , with entrenched protections for the two main communities . The Executive is jointly headed by a First Minister and deputy First Minister drawn from the unionist and nationalist parties . Violence had decreased greatly after the Provisional IRA and loyalist ceasefires in 1994 and in 2005 the Provisional IRA announced the end of its armed campaign and an Independent International Commission on Decommissioning supervised its disarmament and that of other nationalist and unionist paramilitary organisations .
The Assembly and power-sharing Executive were suspended several times but were restored again in 2007 . In that year the British government officially ended its military support of the police in Northern Ireland ( Operation Banner ) and began withdrawing troops .
On 27 June 2012 , Northern Ireland 's deputy first minister and former IRA commander , Martin McGuinness , shook hands with Queen Elizabeth II in Belfast , symbolising reconciliation between the two sides .
==Politics==
The island is divided between the Republic of Ireland , an independent Sovereign state , and Northern Ireland ( a constituent country of the United Kingdom ) . They share an Irish border and both are part of the Common Travel Area .
The Republic of Ireland is a member of the European Union while the United Kingdom is a former member , having both acceded to its precursor entity , the European Economic Community [ EEC ] , in 1973 , and as a consequence there is internal market free movement of people , goods , services and capital across the border .
===Republic of Ireland===
The Republic of Ireland is a parliamentary democracy based on the British model , with a Constitution of Ireland and a popularly elected president who has mostly ceremonial powers . The Government of Ireland is headed by a prime minister , the Taoiseach , who is appointed by the President of Ireland on the nomination of the lower house of parliament , the Dil ireann . Members of the government are chosen from both the Dil and the upper house of parliament , the Seanad ireann . Its capital is Dublin .
The republic today ranks amongst the wealthiest countries in the world in terms of GDP per capita and in 2015 was ranked the sixth most developed nation in the world by the United Nations ' Human Development Index . A period of rapid economic expansion from 1995 onwards became known as the Celtic Tiger period , was brought to an end in 2008 with an unprecedented Post-2008 Irish economic downturn and an economic depression in 2009.
===Northern Ireland===
Northern Ireland is a part of the United Kingdom with a local Northern Ireland Executive and Northern Ireland Assembly which exercise devolved powers . The executive is jointly headed by the first and deputy first minister , with the ministries being allocated in proportion with each party 's representation in the assembly . Its capital is Belfast .
Ultimately political power is held by the UK government , from which Northern Ireland has gone through intermittent periods of direct rule during which devolved powers have been suspended . Northern Ireland elects 18 of the UK House of Commons of the United Kingdom ' 650 MPs . The Northern Ireland Secretary is a cabinet-level post in the British government .
Along with England and Wales and with Scotland , Northern Ireland forms one of the three separate legal jurisdictions of the UK , all of which share the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom as their court of final appeal .
===All-island institutions===
As part of the Good Friday Agreement , the British and Irish governments agreed on the creation of all-island institutions and areas of cooperation . The North/South Ministerial Council is an institution through which ministers from the Government of Ireland and the Northern Ireland Executive agree all-island policies . At least six of these policy areas must have an associated all-island `` implementation bodies , '' and at least six others must be implemented separately in each jurisdiction . The implementation bodies are : Waterways Ireland , the Food Safety Promotion Board , InterTradeIreland , the Special European Union Programmes Body , the North/South Language Body and the Commissioners of Irish Lights Foyle , Carlingford and Irish Lights Commission .
The BritishIrish Intergovernmental Conference provides for co-operation between the Government of Ireland and the Government of the United Kingdom on all matters of mutual interest , especially Northern Ireland . In light of the Republic 's particular interest in the governance of Northern Ireland , `` regular and frequent '' meetings co-chaired by the ROI Minister for Foreign Affairs and the UK Secretary of State for Northern Ireland , dealing with non-devolved matters to do with Northern Ireland and non-devolved all-Ireland issues , are required to take place under the establishing treaty .
The North/South Inter-Parliamentary Association is a joint parliamentary forum for the island of Ireland . It has no formal powers but operates as a forum for discussing matters of common concern between the respective legislatures .
==Economy==
Despite the two jurisdictions using two distinct currencies ( the euro and pound sterling ) , a growing amount of commercial activity is carried out on an all-Ireland basis . This has been facilitated by the two jurisdictions ' shared membership of the European Union , and there have been calls from members of the business community and policymakers for the creation of an `` all-Ireland economy '' to take advantage of economies of scale and boost competitiveness .
There are two multi-city regions on the island of Ireland :
# Dublin-Belfast corridor  3.3 m
# Cork-Limerick-Galway corridor  1 m
Below is a comparison of the regional GDP on the island of Ireland .
The GDP of the Republic of Ireland as of 2018 was $ 382.754 billion ( nominal ) , and in Northern Ireland as of 2016 it was 43 billion ( nominal ) .
The GDP per capita in the Republic of Ireland was $ 78,335 ( nominal ) as of 2018 , and in Northern Ireland ( as of 2016 ) was 23,700 .
===Tourism===
There are three World Heritage Sites on the island : the Br na Binne , Skellig Michael and the Giant 's Causeway . Several other places are on the tentative list , for example the Burren , the Ceide Fields and Mount Stewart .
Some of the most visited sites in Ireland include Bunratty Castle , the Rock of Cashel , the Cliffs of Moher , Holy Cross Abbey and Blarney Castle . Historically important monastic sites include Glendalough and Clonmacnoise , which are maintained as National Monument ( Ireland ) in the Republic of Ireland .
Dublin is the most heavily touristed region and home to several of the most popular attractions such as the Guinness Storehouse and Book of Kells . The west and south west , which includes the Lakes of Killarney and the Dingle peninsula in County Kerry and Connemara and the Aran Islands in County Galway , are also popular tourist destinations .
Achill Island lies off the coast of County Mayo and is Ireland 's largest island . It is a popular tourist destination for surfing and contains 5 Blue Flag beaches and Croaghaun one of the worlds highest sea cliffs . Stately homes , built during the 17th , 18th and 19th centuries in Palladian , Neoclassical architecture and neo-Gothic styles , such as Castle Ward , Castletown House , Bantry House , and Glenveagh Castle are also of interest to tourists . Some have been converted into hotels , such as Ashford Castle , Castle Leslie and Dromoland Castle .
File : Giant 's Causeway ( 14 ) .JPG Giant 's Causeway , County Antrim
File : Skellig Michael03 ( js ) .jpg Skellig Michael , County Kerry
File : Newgrange_ireland_750px.jpg Newgrange , County Meath
===Energy===
Ireland has an ancient industry based on peat ( known locally as `` turf '' ) as a source of energy for home fires . A form of biomass energy , this source of heat is still widely used in rural areas . However , because of the ecological importance of peatlands in storing carbon and their rarity , the EU is attempting to protect this habitat by fining Ireland for digging up peat . In cities , heat is generally supplied by natural gas or [ oil ] , although some urban suppliers distribute sods of turf as `` smokeless fuel '' for domestic use .
The island operates as a single market for electricity . For much of their existence , electricity networks in the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland were entirely separate . Both networks were designed and constructed independently post-partition . However , they are now connected with three interlinks and also connected through Great Britain to mainland Europe . The situation in Northern Ireland is complicated by the issue of private companies not supplying Northern Ireland Electricity with enough power . In the Republic of Ireland , the ESB Group has failed to modernise its power stations , and the availability of power plants has recently averaged only 66 % , one of the worst such rates in Western Europe . EirGrid has started building a High-voltage direct current transmission line between Ireland and Great Britain with a capacity of 500 MW , about 10 % of Ireland 's peak demand .
As with electricity , the natural gas distribution network is also now all-island , with a pipeline linking Gormanston , County Meath , and Ballyclare , County Antrim . Most of Ireland 's gas comes through interconnectors between Twynholm in Scotland and Ballylumford power station , County Antrim and Loughshinny , County Dublin . Supplies come from the Corrib Gas Field , off the coast of County Mayo , with a decreasing supply coming from the Kinsale gas field off the County Cork coast . The County Mayo field faces some localised opposition over Corrib gas controversy to refine the gas onshore .
The Republic has a strong commitment to renewable energy and ranks as one of the top 10 markets for clean technology clean-technology investment in the 2014 Global Green Economy Index . Research and development in renewable energy ( such as wind power ) has increased since 2004 . Large List of wind farms in the Republic of Ireland in Cork , Donegal , Mayo and Antrim . The construction of wind farms has in some cases been delayed by opposition from local communities , some of whom regard the wind turbines as unsightly . The Republic is hindered by an ageing network that was not designed to handle the varying availability of power that comes from wind farms . The ESB 's Turlough Hill facility is the only power-storage facility in the state .
=== Economic history ===
Prior to partition in 1921 , Ireland had a long history as an economic colony - first of the Norse ( 9th to 10th centuries CE ) , and later of England . Though the climate and soil favoured certain forms of agriculture , trade barriers frequently hobbled its development . Repeated invasions and plantations of Ireland `` plantations '' disrupted land tenure land-ownership , and Irish Rebellion ( disambiguation ) also contributed to repeated phases of penal transportation and of Irish emigrant .
Salient events in the economic history of Ireland include :
* 16th and 17th centuries : confiscation and redistribution of land in the Plantations of Ireland
* 1845-1849 : Great Famine ( Ireland ) occasioned depopulation and mass emigration .
* 1846 : Westminster 's repeal of the Corn Laws disrupted Irish agriculture .
==Geography==
Ireland is located in the North-West Europe north-west of Europe , between latitudes 51st parallel north 51 and 56th parallel north 56 N , and longitudes 11th meridian west 11 and 5th meridian west 5 W. It is separated from Great Britain by the Irish Sea and the North Channel ( Great Britain and Ireland ) , which has a width of at its narrowest point . To the west is the northern Atlantic Ocean and to the south is the Celtic Sea , which lies between Ireland and Brittany , in France . Ireland has a total area of , of which the Republic of Ireland occupies 83 percent . Ireland and Great Britain , together with many nearby smaller islands , are known collectively as the British Isles . As British Isles naming dispute in relation to Ireland , the alternate term Britain and Ireland is often used as a neutral term for the islands .
A ring of coastal mountains surround low plains at the centre of the island . The highest of these is Carrauntoohil ( Corrn Tuathail ) in County Kerry , which rises to above sea level . The most arable land lies in the province of Leinster . Western areas can be mountainous and rocky with green panoramic vistas . River Shannon , the island 's longest river at long , rises in County Cavan in the north west and flows through Limerick in the mid west .
=== Geology ===
The island consists of varied geologic province . In the west , around County Galway and County Donegal , is a medium to high grade metamorphic and igneous complex of Caledonides affinity , similar to the Scottish Highlands . Across southeast Ulster and extending southwest to Longford and south to Navan is a province of Ordovician and Silurian rocks , with similarities to the Southern Uplands province of Scotland . Further south , along the County Wexford coastline , is an area of granite intrusion into more Ordovician and Silurian rocks , like that found in Wales .
In the southwest , around Bantry Bay and the mountains of MacGillycuddy 's Reeks , is an area of substantially deformed , lightly metamorphic rock Devonian-aged rocks . This partial ring of `` hard rock '' geology is covered by a blanket of Carboniferous limestone over the centre of the country , giving rise to a comparatively fertile and lush landscape . The west-coast district of the Burren around Lisdoonvarna has well-developed karst features . Significant stratiform lead-zinc mineralisation is found in the limestones around Silvermines and Tynagh .
Hydrocarbon exploration is ongoing following the first major find at the Kinsale Head gas field off Cork ( city ) in the mid-1970s . In 1999 , economically significant finds of natural gas were made in the Corrib Gas Field off the County Mayo coast . This has increased activity off the west coast in parallel with the `` North Sea oil # West of Shetland '' step-out development from the North Sea oil . In 2000 , the Helvick oil field was discovered , which was estimated to contain over of oil .
File : Dunluce Castle.jpg Dunluce Castle , County Antrim
File : Benbulbenmount.jpg Benbulbin , County Sligo
File : Twelve pins.JPG Connemara , County Galway
File : Glendalough.jpg Glendalough , County Wicklow
File : Ladies View ( 2012 ) .jpg Ladies View , County Kerry
File : Loch an Ghleanna Bhig ( Glenbeg Lough ) - geograph.org.uk - 263779.jpg Glenbeg Lough , County Cork
===Climate===
The island 's lush vegetation , a product of its mild climate and frequent rainfall , earns it the sobriquet the Emerald Isle . Overall , Ireland has a mild but changeable oceanic climate with few extremes . The climate is typically insular and is Temperate climate , avoiding the extremes in temperature of many other areas in the world at similar latitudes . This is a result of the moderating moist winds which ordinarily prevail from the southwestern Atlantic .
Precipitation falls throughout the year but is light overall , particularly in the east . The west tends to be wetter on average and prone to Atlantic storms , especially in the late autumn and winter months . These occasionally bring destructive winds and higher total rainfall to these areas , as well as sometimes snow and hail . The regions of north County Galway and east County Mayo have the highest incidents of recorded lightning annually for the island , with lightning occurring approximately five to ten days per year in these areas . Munster , in the south , records the least snow whereas Ulster , in the north , records the most .
Inland areas are warmer in summer and colder in winter . Usually around 40 days of the year are below freezing at inland weather stations , compared to 10 days at coastal stations . Ireland is sometimes affected by heatwaves , most recently in 1995 , 2003 European heat wave , 2006 European heat wave # Ireland , 2013 and 2018 British Isles heat wave . In common with the rest of Europe , Ireland experienced unusually cold weather during Winter of 201011 in Great Britain and Ireland the winter of 2010-11 . Temperatures fell as low as 17.2 ; C ( 1 ; F ) in County Mayo on 20 December and up to a metre ( 3 ; ft ) of snow fell in mountainous areas .
==Flora and fauna==
Because Ireland became isolated from mainland Europe by rising sea levels before the Last Glacial Period had completely finished , it has fewer land animal and plant species than Great Britain or mainland Europe . There are List of mammals of Ireland in Ireland , and of them only 26 land mammal species are considered native to Ireland . Some species , such as , the red fox , European hedgehog and European badger , are very common , whereas others , like the Mountain hare , red deer and pine marten are less so . Aquatic wildlife , such as species of sea turtle , shark , seal , whale , and dolphin , are common off the coast . About 400 species of birds have been recorded in Ireland . Many of these are migratory , including the barn swallow .
Several different habitat types are found in Ireland , including farmland , open woodland , temperate broadleaf and mixed forests , conifer plantations , peat bogs and a variety of coastal habitats . However , agriculture drives current land use patterns in Ireland , limiting natural habitat preserves , particularly for larger wild mammals with greater territorial needs . With no large apex predators in Ireland other than humans and dogs , such populations of animals as semi-wild deer that can not be controlled by smaller predators , such as the fox , are controlled by annual culling .
There are no snakes in Ireland , and only one species of reptile ( the Viviparous lizard ) is native to the island . Extinct species include the Irish elk , the great auk , brown bear and the Wolves in Ireland . Some previously extinct birds , such as the golden eagle , have been reintroduced after decades of Local extinction .
Ireland is now one of the least forested countries in Europe . Until the end of the Middle Ages , Ireland was heavily forested with native trees such as oak , Fraxinus excelsior , Corylus avellana , birch , Alnus glutinosa , willow , Populus tremula , Sorbus aucuparia , Taxus baccata and Scots pine . Only about 10 % of Ireland today is woodland ; most of this is non-native conifer plantations , and only 2 % is native woodland . In Europe , the average woodland cover is over 33 % . In the Republic , about is owned by the state , mainly by the forestry service Coillte . Remnants of native forest can be found scattered around the island , in particular in the Killarney National Park .
Much of the land is now covered with pasture and there are many species of wild-flower . Gorse ( Ulex europaeus ) , a wild furze , is commonly found growing in the uplands and ferns are plentiful in the more moist regions , especially in the western parts . It is home to hundreds of plant species , some of them unique to the island , and has been `` invaded '' by some grasses , such as Spartina anglica .
The algal and seaweed flora is that of the cold-temperate variety . The total number of species is 574 The island has been invaded by some algae , some of which are now well established .
Because of its mild climate , many species , including subtropics sub-tropical species such as Arecaceae , are grown in Ireland . Phytogeography , Ireland belongs to the Atlantic European province of the Circumboreal Region within the Boreal Kingdom . The island can be subdivided into two ecoregions : the Celtic broadleaf forests and North Atlantic moist mixed forests .
===Impact of agriculture===
The long history of agricultural production , coupled with modern intensive agricultural methods such as pesticide and fertiliser use and runoff from contaminants into streams , rivers and lakes , has placed pressure on biodiversity in Ireland . A land of green fields for crop cultivation and cattle rearing limits the space available for the establishment of native wild species . Hedgerows , however , traditionally used for maintaining and demarcating land boundaries , act as a refuge for native wild flora . This ecosystem stretches across the countryside and acts as a network of connections to preserve remnants of the ecosystem that once covered the island . Subsidies under the Common Agricultural Policy , which supported agricultural practices that preserved hedgerow environments , are undergoing reforms . The Common Agricultural Policy had in the past subsidised potentially destructive agricultural practices , for example by emphasising production without placing limits on indiscriminate use of fertilisers and pesticides ; but reforms have gradually decoupled subsidies from production levels and introduced environmental and other requirements . 32 % of Ireland 's greenhouse gas emissions are correlated to agriculture.Forested areas typically consist of monoculture plantations of non-native species , which may result in habitats that are not suitable for supporting native species of invertebrates . Natural areas require fencing to prevent over-grazing by Deer of Ireland and sheep that roam over uncultivated areas . Grazing in this manner is one of the main factors preventing the natural regeneration of forests across many regions of the country .
==Demographics==
People have lived in Ireland for over 9,000 years . Early historical and genealogical records note the existence of major groups such as the Cruthin , Corcu Logde , Dl Riata , Dirine , Deirgtine , Delbhna , rainn , Laigin , Ulaid . Later major groups included the Connachta , Ciannachta , Eganachta . Smaller groups included the aithechthatha ( see Attacotti ) , Clraighe , Carraige , Conmaicne , Dartraighe , Disi , ile , Fir Bolg , Fortuatha , Gailenga , Gamanraige , Mairtine , Mscraige , Partraige , Soghain , Uaithni , U Maine , U Liathin . Many survived into late medieval times , others vanished as they became politically unimportant . Over the past 1,200 years , Vikings , Normans , Welsh people , Flemings , Scottish people , English people , Africans , Eastern Europeans and South Americans have all added to the population and have had significant influences on Irish culture .
The population of Ireland rose rapidly from the 16th century until the mid-19th century , interrupted briefly by the Irish Famine ( 174041 ) Famine of 174041 , which killed roughly two fifths of the island 's population . The population rebounded and multiplied over the next century , but the Great Famine ( Ireland ) of the 1840s caused one million deaths and forced over one million more to emigrate in its immediate wake . Over the following century , the population was reduced by over half , at a time when the general trend in European countries was for populations to rise by an average of three-fold .
Ireland 's largest religious group is Christianity . The largest denomination is Roman Catholicism , representing over 73 % for the island ( and about 87 % of the Republic of Ireland ) . Most of the rest of the population adhere to one of the various Protestant denominations ( about 48 % of Northern Ireland ) . The largest is the Anglicanism Church of Ireland . The Islam in Ireland is growing in Ireland , mostly through increased immigration , with a 50 % increase in the republic between the 2006 and 2011 census . The island has a small History of the Jews in Ireland . About 4 % of the Republic 's population and about 14 % of the Northern Ireland population describe themselves as of no religion . In a 2010 survey conducted on behalf of the Irish Times , 32 % of respondents said they went to a religious service more than once per week .
===Divisions and settlements===
Traditionally , Ireland is subdivided into Provinces of Ireland : Connacht ( west ) , Leinster ( east ) , Munster ( south ) , and Ulster ( north ) . In a system that developed between the 13th and 17th centuries , Ireland has Counties of Ireland . Twenty-six of these counties are in the Republic of Ireland , and Counties of Northern Ireland . The six counties that constitute Northern Ireland are all in the province of Ulster ( which has nine counties in total ) . As such , Ulster is often used as a synonym for Northern Ireland , although the two are not coterminous.In the Republic of Ireland , counties form the basis of the system of local government . Counties County Dublin , County Cork , County Limerick , County Galway , County Waterford and County Tipperary have been broken up into smaller administrative areas . However , they are still treated as counties for cultural and some official purposes , for example , postal addresses and by the Ordnance Survey Ireland . Counties in Northern Ireland are Local government in Northern Ireland for local governmental purposes , but , as in the Republic , their traditional boundaries are still used for informal purposes such as sports leagues and in cultural or tourism contexts .
City status in Ireland is decided by legislation or royal charter . Dublin , with over 1 million residents in the Greater Dublin Area , is the largest city on the island . Belfast , with 579,726 residents , is the largest city in Northern Ireland . City status does not directly equate with population size . For example , Armagh , with 14,590 is the seat of the Church of Ireland and the Roman Catholic Primate of All Ireland and was re-granted City status in the United Kingdom # Northern Ireland by Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom in 1994 ( having lost that status in Municipal Corporations ( Ireland ) Act 1840 ) . In the Republic of Ireland , Kilkenny , seat of the Butler dynasty , while no longer a city for administrative purposes ( since the 2001 Local Government Act 2001 ) , is entitled by law to continue to use the description .
===Migration===
The population of Ireland collapsed dramatically during the second half of the 19th century . A population of over 8 million in 1841 was reduced to slightly more than 4 million by 1921 . In part , the fall in population was caused by death from the Great Famine ( Ireland ) of 1845 to 1852 , which took about 1 million lives . However , by far the greater cause of population decline was the dire economic state of the country which led to an entrenched culture of emigration lasting until the 21st century .
Emigration from Ireland in the 19th century contributed to the populations of England , the United States , Canada and Australia , in all of which a large Irish diaspora lives . , 4.3 million Canadians , or 14 % of the population , were of Irish descent , while around one-third of the Australian population had an element of Irish descent . , there were 40 million Irish-Americans and 33 million Americans who claimed Irish ancestry .
With growing prosperity since the last decade of the 20th century , Ireland became a destination for immigrants . Since the European Union expanded to include Poland in 2004 , Polish people have made up the largest number of immigrants ( over 150,000 ) from Central Europe . There has also been significant immigration from Lithuania , Czech Republic and Latvia .
The Republic of Ireland in particular has seen large-scale immigration , with 420,000 foreign nationals as of 2006 , about 10 % of the population . A quarter of births ( 24 percent ) in 2009 were to mothers born outside Ireland . Up to 50,000 eastern and central European migrant workers left Ireland in response to the Irish financial crisis .
===Languages===
The two official languages of the Republic of Ireland are Irish and English . Each language has produced noteworthy literature . Irish , though now only the language of a minority , was the vernacular of the Irish people for thousands of years and was possibly introduced during the Iron Age . It began to be written down after Christianisation in the 5th century and spread to Scotland and the Isle of Man , where it evolved into the Scottish Gaelic and Manx Language languages respectively .
The Irish language has a vast treasury of written texts from many centuries and is divided by linguists into Old Irish from the 6th to 10th century , Middle Irish from the 10th to 13th century , Early Modern Irish until the 17th century , and the Modern Irish spoken today . It remained the dominant language of Ireland for most of those periods , having influences from Latin Language , Old Norse , Anglo-Norman language and English . It declined under British rule but remained the majority tongue until the early 19th century , and since then has been a minority language .
The Gaelic Revival of the early 20th century has had a long-term influence . Irish is taught in mainstream Irish schools as a compulsory subject , but teaching methods have been criticised for their ineffectiveness , with the lack of level of ability after , typically , fourteen years of instruction cited .
There is now a network of urban Irish speakers in both the Republic and Northern Ireland , especially in Dublin and Belfast , with the children of such Irish speakers sometimes attending Irish-medium schools ( Gaelscoil Gaelscoileanna ) . It has been argued that they tend to be more highly educated than monolingual English speakers . Recent research suggests that urban Irish is developing in a direction of its own , both in pronunciation and grammar .
Traditional rural Irish-speaking areas , known collectively as the Gaeltacht , are in linguistic decline . The main Gaeltacht areas are in the west , south-west and north-west . They are to be found in Donegal , Mayo , Galway , western Cork and Kerry with smaller Gaeltacht areas near Dungarvan in Waterford , Navan in Meath .
Hiberno-English was first introduced during the Norman invasion . It was spoken by a few peasants and merchants brought over from England , and was largely replaced by Irish before the Tudor conquest of Ireland . It was introduced as the official language with the Tudor and Cromwellian conquests . The Ulster plantations gave it a permanent foothold in Ulster , and it remained the official and upper-class language elsewhere , the Irish-speaking chieftains and nobility having been deposed . Language shift during the 19th century replaced Irish with English as the first language for a vast majority of the population .
Less than 10 % of the population of the Republic of Ireland today speak Irish regularly outside of the education system and 38 % of those over 15 years are classified as `` Irish speakers '' . In Northern Ireland , English is the de facto official language , but official recognition is afforded to Irish , including specific protective measures under Part III of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages . A lesser status ( including recognition under Part II of the Charter ) is given to Ulster Scots dialects , which are spoken by roughly 2 % of Northern Ireland residents , and also spoken by some in the Republic of Ireland . Since the 1960s with the increase in immigration , many more languages have been introduced , particularly deriving from Asia and Eastern Europe .
Shelta language , the language of the nomadic Irish Travellers is native to Ireland .
==Culture==
Ireland 's culture comprises elements of the culture of ancient peoples , later immigrant and broadcast cultural influences ( chiefly Gaels , Anglicisation , Americanisation and aspects of broader European culture ) . In broad terms , Ireland is regarded as one of the Celtic nations of Europe , alongside Scotland , Wales , Cornwall , Isle of Man and Brittany . This combination of cultural influences is visible in the intricate designs termed Irish Interlace ( visual arts ) or Celtic knotwork . These can be seen in the ornamentation of medieval religious and secular works . The style is still popular today in jewellery and graphic art , as is the distinctive style of traditional Irish music and dance , and has become indicative of modern `` Celtic '' culture in general .
Religion in Ireland has played a significant role in the cultural life of the island since ancient times ( and since the 17th century Plantations of Ireland , has been the focus of political identity and divisions on the island ) . Ireland 's pre-Christian heritage fused with the Celtic Church following the missions of Saint Patrick in the 5th century . The Hiberno-Scottish missions , begun by the Irish monk Saint Columba , spread the Celtic Christianity to pagan Anglo-Saxon England and the Frankish Empire . These missions brought written language to an illiterate population of Europe during the Dark Ages that followed the fall of Rome , earning Ireland the sobriquet , `` the island of saints and scholars '' .
Since the 20th century Irish pubs worldwide have become outposts of Irish culture , especially those with a full range of cultural and gastronomic offerings .
The Republic of Ireland 's national theatre is the Abbey Theatre , which was founded in 1904 , and the national Irish-language theatre is An Taibhdhearc , which was established in 1928 in Galway . Playwrights such as Sen O'Casey , Brian Friel , Sebastian Barry , Conor McPherson and Billy Roche are internationally renowned .
===Arts===
====Literature====
Ireland has made a large contribution to world literature in all its branches , both in Irish and English . Poetry in Irish is among the oldest vernacular literature in Europe , with the earliest examples dating from the 6th century .
Irish remained the dominant literary language down to the nineteenth century , despite the spread of English from the seventeenth century on . Prominent names from the medieval period and later include Gofraidh Fionn  Dlaigh ( fourteenth century ) , Dibh  Bruadair ( seventeenth century ) and Aogn  Rathaille ( eighteenth century ) . Eibhln Dubh N Chonaill ( c. 1743  c. 1800 ) was an outstanding poet in the oral tradition . The latter part of the nineteenth century saw a rapid replacement of Irish by English . By 1900 , however , cultural nationalists had begun the Gaelic revival , which saw the beginnings of modern literature in Irish . This was to produce a number of notable writers , including Mirtn  Cadhain , Mire Mhac an tSaoi and others . Irish-language publishers such as Coiscim and Cl Iar-Chonnacht continue to produce scores of titles every year .
In English , Jonathan Swift , often called the foremost satirist in the English language , gained fame for works such as Gulliver 's Travels and A Modest Proposal . Other notable 18th-century writers of Irish origin included Oliver Goldsmith and Richard Brinsley Sheridan , though they spent most of their lives in England . The Anglo-Irish novel came to the fore in the nineteenth century , featuring such writers as Charles Kickham , William Carleton , and ( in collaboration ) Edith Somerville and Violet Florence Martin . The playwright and poet Oscar Wilde , noted for his epigrams , was born in Ireland .
In the 20th century , Ireland produced four winners of the Nobel Prize for Literature : George Bernard Shaw , William Butler Yeats , Samuel Beckett and Seamus Heaney . Although not a Nobel Prize winner , James Joyce is widely considered to be one of the most significant writers of the 20th century . Joyce 's 1922 novel Ulysses ( novel ) is considered one of the most important works of Modernist literature and his life is celebrated annually on 16 June in Dublin as `` Bloomsday '' . A comparable writer in Irish is Mirtn  Cadhain , whose novel Cr na Cille is regarded as a modernist masterpiece and has been translated into several languages .
Modern Irish literature is often connected with its rural heritage through English-language writers such as John McGahern and Seamus Heaney and Irish-language writers such as Mirtn  Direin and others from the Gaeltacht .
====Music====
Music has been in evidence in Ireland since prehistoric times . Although in the early Middle Ages the church was `` quite unlike its counterpart in continental Europe '' , there was considerable interchange between monastic settlements in Ireland and the rest of Europe that contributed to what is known as Gregorian chant . Outside religious establishments , musical genres in early Gaelic Ireland are referred to as a triad of weeping music ( goltraige ) , laughing music ( geantraige ) and sleeping music ( suantraige ) . Vocal and instrumental music ( e.g . for the harp , pipes , and various string instruments ) was transmitted orally , but the Irish harp , in particular , was of such significance that it became Ireland 's national symbol . Classical music following European models first developed in urban areas , in establishments of Anglo-Irish rule such as Dublin Castle , St Patrick 's Cathedral , Dublin St Patrick 's Cathedral and Christ Church Cathedral , Dublin as well as the country houses of the Anglo-Irish ascendancy , with the first performance of George Frideric Handel 's Messiah ( Handel ) ( 1742 ) being among the highlights of the baroque era . In the 19th century , public concerts provided access to classical music to all classes of society . Yet , for political and financial reasons Ireland has been too small to provide a living to many musicians , so the names of the better-known List of Irish classical composers of this time belong to emigrants .
Irish folk music and dance has seen a surge in popularity and global coverage since the 1960s . In the middle years of the 20th century , as Irish society was modernising , traditional music had fallen out of favour , especially in urban areas . However during the 1960s , there was a revival of interest in Irish traditional music led by groups such as The Dubliners , The Chieftains , The Wolfe Tones , the Clancy Brothers , Sweeney 's Men and individuals like Sen  Riada and Christy Moore . Groups and musicians including Horslips , Van Morrison and Thin Lizzy incorporated elements of Irish traditional music into contemporary rock music and , during the 1970s and 1980s , the distinction between traditional and rock musicians became blurred , with many individuals regularly crossing over between these styles of playing . This trend can be seen more recently in the work of artists like Enya , The Saw Doctors , The Corrs , Sinad O'Connor , Clannad ( musical group ) , The Cranberries and The Pogues among others .
====Art====
The earliest known Irish graphic art and sculpture are Neolithic carvings found at sites such as Newgrange and is traced through Bronze Age artefacts and the religious carvings and illuminated manuscripts of the medieval period . During the course of the 19th and 20th centuries , a strong tradition of painting emerged , including such figures as John Butler Yeats , William Orpen , Jack Yeats and Louis le Brocquy . Contemporary Irish visual artists of note include Sean Scully , Kevin Abosch , and Alice Maher .
===Science===
The Irish philosopher and theologian Johannes Scotus Eriugena was considered one of the leading intellectuals of the early Middle Ages . Sir Ernest Henry Shackleton , an Irish explorer , was one of the principal figures of Antarctic exploration . He , along with his expedition , made the first ascent of Mount Erebus and the discovery of the approximate location of the South Magnetic Pole . Robert Boyle was a 17th-century natural philosopher , chemist , physicist , inventor and early gentleman scientist . He is largely regarded as one of the founders of modern chemistry and is best known for the formulation of Boyle 's law .
19th-century physicist , John Tyndall , discovered the Tyndall effect . Father Nicholas Joseph Callan , Professor of Natural Philosophy in Maynooth College , is best known for his invention of the induction coil , transformer and he discovered an early method of galvanisation in the 19th century .
Other notable Irish physicists include Ernest Walton , winner of the 1951 Nobel Prize in Physics . With Sir John Douglas Cockcroft , he was the first to split the nucleus of the atom by artificial means and made contributions to the development of a new theory of wave equation . William Thomson , or Lord Kelvin , is the person whom the absolute temperature unit , the kelvin , is named after . Sir Joseph Larmor , a physicist and mathematician , made innovations in the understanding of electricity , dynamics , thermodynamics and the electron theory of matter . His most influential work was Aether and Matter , a book on theoretical physics published in 1900.
George Johnstone Stoney introduced the term electron in 1891 . John Stewart Bell was the originator of Bell 's Theorem and a paper concerning the discovery of the Chiral anomaly Bell-Jackiw-Adler anomaly and was nominated for a Nobel prize . The astronomer Jocelyn Bell Burnell , from Lurgan , County Armagh , discovered pulsars in 1967. Notable mathematicians include Sir William Rowan Hamilton , famous for work in Hamiltonian mechanics and the invention of quaternions . Francis Ysidro Edgeworth 's contribution of the Edgeworth Box remains influential in neo-classical microeconomic theory to this day ; while Richard Cantillon inspired Adam Smith , among others . John B. Cosgrave was a specialist in number theory and discovered a 2000-digit prime number in 1999 and a record composite Fermat number in 2003 . John Lighton Synge made progress in different fields of science , including mechanics and geometrical methods in general relativity . He had mathematician John Forbes Nash , Jr. as one of his students . Kathleen Lonsdale , born in Ireland and most known for her work with X-ray crystallography , became the first female president of the British Association for the Advancement of Science .
Ireland has nine universities , seven in the Republic of Ireland and two in Northern Ireland , including Trinity College , Dublin and the University College Dublin , as well as numerous third-level colleges and institutes and a branch of the Open University , the Open University in Ireland .
===Sports===
Gaelic football is the most popular sport in Ireland in terms of match attendance and community involvement , with about 2,600 clubs on the island . In 2003 it represented 34 % of total sports attendances at events in Ireland and abroad , followed by [ at 23 % , soccer at 16 % and rugby football rugby ] at 8 % . The [ [ All-Ireland Football Final is the most watched event in the sporting calendar . Soccer is the most widely played team game on the island and the most popular in Northern Ireland .
Other sporting activities with the highest levels of playing participation include swimming , golf , aerobics , cycling , and billiards/snooker . Many other sports are also played and followed , including boxing , cricket , fishing , greyhound racing , Gaelic handball , field hockey , horse racing , motor sport , show jumping and tennis .
The island fields a single international team in most sports . One notable exception to this is association football , although both associations continued to field international teams under the name `` Ireland '' until the 1950s . The sport is also the most notable exception where the Republic of Ireland national football team and Northern Ireland national football team field separate international teams . Northern Ireland has produced two World Snooker Champions .
====Field sports====
Gaelic football , [ and Gaelic handball handball ] are the best-known of the Irish traditional sports , collectively known as [ [ Gaelic games . Gaelic games are governed by the Gaelic Athletic Association ( GAA ) , with the exception of ladies ' Gaelic football and camogie ( women 's variant of hurling ) , which are governed by separate organisations . The headquarters of the GAA ( and the main stadium ) is located at the 82,500 capacity Croke Park in north Dublin . Many major GAA games are played there , including the semi-finals and finals of the All-Ireland Senior Football Championship and All-Ireland Senior Hurling Championship . During the redevelopment of the Lansdowne Road in 20072010 , international rugby and soccer were played there . All GAA players , even at the highest level , are amateurs , receiving no wages , although they are permitted to receive a limited amount of sport-related income from commercial sponsorship .
The Irish Football Association ( IFA ) was originally the governing body for soccer across the island . The game has been played in an organised fashion in Ireland since the 1870s , with Cliftonville F.C . in Belfast being Ireland 's oldest club . It was most popular , especially in its first decades , around Belfast and in Ulster . However , some clubs based outside Belfast thought that the IFA largely favoured Ulster-based clubs in such matters as selection for the national team . In 1921 , following an incident in which , despite an earlier promise , the IFA moved an Irish Cup semi-final replay from Dublin to Belfast , Dublin-based clubs broke away to form the Football Association of the Irish Free State . Today the southern association is known as the Football Association of Ireland ( FAI ) . Despite being initially blacklisted by the Home Nations ' associations , the FAI was recognised by FIFA in 1923 and organised its first international fixture in 1926 ( against Italy national football team ) . However , both the IFA and FAI continued to select their teams from the whole of Ireland , with some players earning international caps for matches with both teams . Both also referred to their respective teams as Ireland .
In 1950 , FIFA directed the associations only to select players from within their respective territories and , in 1953 , directed that the FAI 's team be known only as `` Republic of Ireland national football team '' and that the IFA 's team be known as `` Northern Ireland national football team '' ( with certain exceptions ) . Northern Ireland qualified for the FIFA World Cup finals in 1958 FIFA World Cup ( reaching the quarter-finals ) , 1982 FIFA World Cup and 1986 FIFA World Cup and the UEFA European Championship in UEFA Euro 2016 . The Republic qualified for the World Cup finals in 1990 FIFA World Cup ( reaching the quarter-finals ) , 1994 FIFA World Cup , 2002 FIFA World Cup and the European Championship in UEFA Euro 1988 , UEFA Euro 2012 and UEFA Euro 2016 . Across Ireland , there is significant interest in the Premier League and , to a lesser extent , Scottish Premier League soccer leagues .
Ireland fields a single Ireland national rugby union team and a single association , the Irish Rugby Football Union , governs the sport across the island . The Irish rugby team have played in every Rugby World Cup , making the quarter-finals in six of them . Ireland also hosted games during the 1991 Rugby World Cup and the 1999 Rugby World Cups ( including a quarter-final ) . There are four professional Irish teams ; all four play in the Pro14 and at least three compete for the Heineken Cup . Irish rugby has become increasingly competitive at both the international and provincial levels since the sport went professional in 1994 . During that time , Ulster Rugby ( 199899 Heineken Cup ) , Munster Rugby ( 200506 Heineken Cup and 200708 Heineken Cup ) and Leinster Rugby ( 200809 Heineken Cup , 201011 Heineken Cup and 201112 Heineken Cup ) have won the Heineken Cup . In addition to this , the Irish International side has had increased success in the Six Nations Championship against the other European elite sides . This success , including Triple Crown ( rugby union ) in 2004 , 2006 and 2007 , culminated with a clean sweep of victories , known as a Grand Slam ( rugby union ) , in 2009 and 2018.
====Other sports====
Horse racing and greyhound racing are both popular in Ireland . There are frequent horse race meetings and greyhound stadiums are well-attended . The island is noted for the breeding and training of race horses and is also a large exporter of racing dogs . The horse racing sector is largely concentrated in the County Kildare .
Irish athletics has seen a heightened success rate since the year 2000 , with Sonia O'Sullivan winning two medals at 5,000 metres on the track ; gold at the 1995 IAAF World Championships in Athletics and silver at the 2000 Summer Olympics . Gillian O'Sullivan won silver in the 20k walk at the 2003 World Championships , while sprint hurdler Derval O'Rourke won gold at the 2006 World Indoor Championship in Moscow . Olive Loughnane won a silver medal in the 20k walk in the World Athletics Championships in Berlin in 2009.
Ireland has won more medals in boxing than in any other Olympic sport . Boxing is governed by the Irish Athletic Boxing Association . Michael Carruth won a gold medal and Wayne McCullough won a silver medal in the 1992 Summer Olympics . In 2008 Kenneth Egan won a silver medal in the Beijing Games . Paddy Barnes secured bronze in those games and gold in the 2010 European Amateur Boxing Championships ( where Ireland came 2nd in the overall medal table ) and 2010 Commonwealth Games . Katie Taylor has won gold in every European and World championship since 2005 . In August 2012 at the Olympic Games in London , Taylor created history by becoming the first Irish woman to win a gold medal in boxing in the 60 ; kg lightweight .
Golf is very popular , and golf tourism is a major industry attracting more than 240,000 golfing visitors annually . The 2006 Ryder Cup was held at The Kildare Hotel and Golf Club in County Kildare . Pdraig Harrington became the first Irishman since Fred Daly ( golfer ) in 1947 to win the The Open Championship at Carnoustie in July 2007 . He successfully defended his title in July 2008 before going on to win the PGA Championship in August . Harrington became the first European to win the PGA Championship in 78 years and was the first winner from Ireland . Three golfers from Northern Ireland have been particularly successful . In 2010 , Graeme McDowell became the first Irish golfer to win the U.S. Open ( golf ) U.S. Open , and the first European to win that tournament since 1970 . Rory McIlroy , at the age of 22 , won the 2011 U.S. Open , while Darren Clarke 's latest victory was the 2011 Open Championship at Royal St. George 's . In August 2012 , McIlroy won his 2nd major championship by winning the USPGA Championship by a record margin of 8 shots .
====Recreation====
The west coast of Ireland , Lahinch and Donegal Bay in particular , have popular surfing beaches , being fully exposed to the Atlantic Ocean . Donegal Bay is shaped like a funnel and catches west/south-west Atlantic winds , creating good surf , especially in winter . Since just before the year 2010 , Bundoran has hosted European championship surfing . Scuba diving is increasingly popular in Ireland with clear waters and large populations of sea life , particularly along the western seaboard . There are also many shipwrecks along the coast of Ireland , with some of the best wreck dives being in Malin Head and off the County Cork coast .
With thousands of lakes , over of fish-bearing rivers and over of coastline , Ireland is a popular angling destination . The temperate Irish climate is suited to sport angling . While salmon and trout fishing remain popular with anglers , salmon fishing in particular received a boost in 2006 with the closing of the salmon driftnet fishery . Coarse fishing continues to increase its profile . Sea angling is developed with many beaches mapped and signposted , and the range of sea angling species is around 80.
===Food and drink===
Food and cuisine in Ireland takes its influence from the crops grown and animals farmed in the island 's temperate climate and from the social and political circumstances of Irish history . For example , whilst from the Middle Ages until the arrival of the potato in the 16th century the dominant feature of the Irish economy was the herding of cattle , the number of cattle a person owned was equated to their social standing . Thus herders would avoid slaughtering a milk-producing cow .
For this reason , pork and white meat were more common than beef , and thick fatty strips of salted bacon ( known as rashers ) and the eating of salted butter ( i.e . a dairy product rather than beef itself ) have been a central feature of the diet in Ireland since the Middle Ages . The practice of bleeding cattle and mixing the blood with milk and butter ( not unlike the practice of the Maasai people ) was common and black pudding , made from blood , grain ( usually barley ) and seasoning , remains a breakfast staple in Ireland . All of these influences can be seen today in the phenomenon of the `` breakfast roll '' .
The introduction of the potato in the second half of the 16th century heavily influenced cuisine thereafter . Great poverty encouraged a subsistence approach to food , and by the mid-19th century the vast majority of the population sufficed with a diet of potatoes and milk . A typical family , consisting of a man , a woman and four children , would eat of potatoes per week . Consequently , dishes that are considered as national dishes represent a fundamental simplicity to cooking , such as the Irish stew , bacon and cabbage , boxty , a type of potato pancake , or colcannon , a dish of mashed potatoes and kale or cabbage .
Since the last quarter of the 20th century , with a re-emergence of wealth in Ireland , a `` New Irish Cuisine '' based on traditional ingredients incorporating international influences has emerged . This cuisine is based on fresh vegetables , fish ( especially salmon , trout , oysters , mussels and other shellfish ) , as well as traditional soda breads and the wide range of hand-made List of Irish cheeses that are now being produced across the country . An example of this new cuisine is `` Dublin Lawyer '' : lobster cooked in whiskey and cream . The potato remains however a fundamental feature of this cuisine and the Irish remain the highest per capita consumers of potatoes in Europe . Traditional regional foods can be found throughout the country , for example coddle in Dublin or drisheen in Cork , both a type of sausage , or blaa , a doughy white bread particular to Waterford .
Ireland once dominated the world 's market for whiskey , producing 90 % of the world 's whiskey at the start of the 20th century . However , as a consequence of bootleggers during the prohibition in the United States ( who sold poor-quality whiskey bearing Irish-sounding names thus eroding the pre-prohibition popularity for Irish brands ) and tariffs on Irish whiskey across the British Empire during the Anglo-Irish Trade War of the 1930s , sales of Irish whiskey worldwide fell to a mere 2 % by the mid-20th century . In 1953 , an Irish government survey , found that 50 % of whiskey drinkers in the United States had never heard of Irish whiskey .
Irish whiskey , as researched in 2009 by the CNBC American broadcaster , remains popular domestically and has grown in international sales steadily over a few decades . Typically CNBC states Irish whiskey is not as smoky as a Scotch whisky , but not as sweet as American whiskey or Canadian whiskey whiskies . Whiskey forms the basis of traditional Irish Cream , such as Baileys Irish Cream , and the `` Irish coffee '' ( a cocktail of coffee and whiskey reputedly invented at Foynes Foynes flying-boat station ) is probably the best-known Irish cocktail .
Porter ( beer ) , a kind of porter beer , particularly Guinness , is typically associated with Ireland , although historically it was more closely associated with London . Porter remains very popular , although it has lost sales since the mid-20th century to lager . Cider , particularly Magners ( marketed in the Republic of Ireland as Bulmers ) , is also a popular drink . Red lemonade , a soft-drink , is consumed on its own and as a mixer , particularly with whiskey .
==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
*
* Beckett , J.C . The making of Modern Ireland 1603-1923 ( 1971 )
*
* Bew , Paul . Ireland : The Politics of Enmity 1789-2006 ( 2007 ) .
*
* Daly , Mary E. Sixties Ireland : reshaping the economy , state and society , 19571973 ( Cambridge University Press , 2016 ) .
*
*
*
* Ferriter , Diarmaid . `` Women and political change in Ireland since 1960 . '' ire-Ireland 43.1 ( 2008 ) : 179-204.
*
* Foster , R. F. Luck and the Irish : A Brief History of Change 1970-2000 ( 2007 ) excerpt
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
==External links==
*
* Government of Ireland
* Northern Ireland Executive
Category : Ireland
Category : British Isles
Category : Celtic nations
Category : Divided regions
Category : International islands <article_end> <article_start>  
The Bahamas ( ) , known officially as the Commonwealth of The Bahamas , is a country within the Lucayan Archipelago of the West Indies in the Atlantic . It takes up 97 % of the Lucayan Archipelago 's land area and is home to 88 % of the archipelago 's population . The archipelagic state consists of more than 700 islands , cays , and islets in the Atlantic Ocean , and is located north of Cuba and northwest of the island of Hispaniola ( split between Haiti and the Dominican Republic ) and the Turks and Caicos Islands , southeast of the United States state of Florida , and east of the Florida Keys . The capital is Nassau , Bahamas on the island of New Providence . The Royal Bahamas Defence Force describes The Bahamas ' territory as encompassing of ocean space .
The Bahamas were inhabited by the Lucayan people , a branch of the Arawakan-speaking Tano people , for many centuries . Christopher Columbus was the first European to see the islands , making his first landfall in the 'New World ' in 1492 . Later , the Spain shipped the native Lucayans to and enslaved them on Hispaniola , after which the Bahama islands were mostly deserted from 1513 until 1648 , when Kingdom of England colonists from Bermuda settled on the island of Eleuthera .
The Bahamas became a Kingdom of Great Britain crown colony in 1718 , when the British clamped down on piracy . After the American Revolutionary War , the Crown resettled thousands of American Loyalists to The Bahamas ; they took enslaved people with them and established plantations on land grants . African enslaved people and their descendants constituted the majority of the population from this period on . The slave trade was abolished by the British in 1807 ; slavery in The Bahamas was abolished in 1834 . Subsequently , The Bahamas became a haven for freed African slaves . Africans liberated from illegal slave ships were resettled on the islands by the Royal Navy , while some Slavery in North America and Seminoles escaped to The Bahamas from Florida . Bahamians were even known to recognise the freedom of enslaved people carried by the ships of other nations which reached The Bahamas . Today Afro-Bahamians make up 90 % of the population of 332,634.
The country gained governmental independence in 1973 led by Lynden Pindling Sir Lynden O. Pindling , with Elizabeth II as Queen of The Bahamas . In terms of gross domestic product per capita , The Bahamas is one of the richest countries in the Americas ( following the United States and Canada ) , with an economy based on tourism and offshore finance .
==Etymology==
The name Bahamas is most likely derived from either the Tano language ba ha ma ( `` big upper middle land '' ) , which was a term for the region used by the indigenous people , or possibly from the Spanish language baja mar ( `` shallow water or sea '' or `` low tide '' ) reflecting the shallow waters of the area . Alternatively , it may originate from Guanahani , a local name of unclear meaning .
The word The constitutes an integral part of the short form of the name and is , therefore , capitalised . The Constitution of the Commonwealth of The Bahamas , the country 's fundamental law , capitalises the `` T '' in `` The Bahamas '' .
==History==
===Pre-colonial era===
The first inhabitants of The Bahamas were the Tano people people , who moved into the uninhabited southern islands from Hispaniola and Cuba around the 800s1000s AD , having migrated there from South America ; they came to be known as the Lucayan people . An estimated 30,000 Lucayans inhabited The Bahamas at the time of Christopher Columbus 's arrival in 1492.
===Arrival of the Spanish===
Columbus 's first landfall in what was to Europeans a 'New World ' was on an island he named San Salvador ( known to the Lucayans as Guanahani ) . Whilst there is a general consensus that this island lay within The Bahamas , precisely which island Columbus landed on is a matter of scholarly debate . Some researchers believe the site to be present-day San Salvador Island ( formerly known as Watling 's Island ) , situated in the southeastern Bahamas , whilst an alternative theory holds that Columbus landed to the southeast on Samana Cay , according to calculations made in 1986 by National Geographic ( magazine ) writer and editor Joseph Judge , based on Columbus 's log . On the landfall island , Columbus made first contact with the Lucayans and exchanged goods with them , claiming the islands for the Crown of Castile , before proceeding to explore the larger isles of the Greater Antilles .
The 1494 Treaty of Tordesillas theoretically divided the new territories between the Kingdom of Castile and the Kingdom of Portugal , placing The Bahamas in the Spanish sphere ; however they did little to press their claim on the ground . The Spanish did however exploit the native Lucayan peoples , many of whom were enslaved and sent to Hispaniola for use as forced labour . The slaves suffered harsh conditions and most died from contracting Infectious disease to which they had no immunity ( medical ) ; half of the Taino died from smallpox alone . As a result of these depredations the population of The Bahamas was severely diminished .
===Arrival of the English===
The English had expressed an interest in The Bahamas as early as 1629 . However , it was not until 1648 that the first English settlers arrived on the islands . Known as the Eleutherian Adventurers and led by William Sayle , they migrated to Bermuda seeking greater religious freedom . These English Puritans established the first permanent European settlement on an island which they named 'Eleuthera ' , Greek for 'freedom ' . They later settled New Providence , naming it Sayle 's Island . Life proved harder than envisaged however , and many  including Sayle  chose to return to Bermuda . To survive , the remaining settlers Wrecking ( shipwreck ) # The Bahamas .
In 1670 , Charles II of England granted the islands to the Lords Proprietors of the Province of Carolina in North America . They rented the islands from the king with rights of trading , tax , appointing Governor # British Empire and Commonwealth of Nations , and administering the country from their base on New Providence . Piracy and attacks from hostile foreign powers were a constant threat . In 1684 , Spanish privateer Juan de Alcon Raid on Charles Town Charles Town ( later renamed Nassau , Bahamas ) , and in 1703 , a joint Franco-Spanish expedition Raid on Nassau during the War of the Spanish Succession .
===18th century===
During proprietary rule , The Bahamas became a haven for Piracy , including Blackbeard ( circa 16801718 ) . To put an end to the 'Pirates ' republic ' and restore orderly government , Great Britain made The Bahamas a British overseas territories in 1718 , which they dubbed `` The Bahama islands '' under the royal governorship of Woodes Rogers . After a difficult struggle , he succeeded in suppressing piracy . In 1720 , the Raid on Nassau ( 1720 ) during the War of the Quadruple Alliance . In 1729 , a local assembly was established giving a degree of self-governance for the English settlers . The reforms had been planned by the previous Governor George Phenney and authorised in July 1728.
During the American War of Independence in the late 18th century , the islands became a target for US naval forces . Under the command of Commodore Esek Hopkins , United States Marine Corps , the US Navy occupied Nassau in 1776 , before being evacuated a few days later . In 1782 a Spanish fleet appeared off the coast of Nassau , and the city Capture of The Bahamas ( 1782 ) . Later , in April 1783 , on a visit made by Prince William of the United Kingdom ( later to become William IV of Great Britain ) to Luis de Unzaga at his residence in the Captaincy General of Havana , they made prisoner exchange agreements and also dealt with the preliminaries of the Treaty of Paris ( 1783 ) , in which the recently conquered Bahamas would be exchanged for Spanish Florida , which would still have to conquer the city of St. Augustine , Florida in 1784 by order of Luis de Unzaga ; after that , also in 1784 , the Bahamas would be declared a British colony .
After US independence , the British resettled some 7,300 Loyalist ( American Revolution ) with their African slaves in The Bahamas , including 2,000 from New York and at least 1,033 European , 2,214 African ancestrals and a few Native American Creek people from East Florida . Most of the refugees resettled from New York had fled from other colonies , including West Florida , which the Spanish captured during the war . The government granted land to the planters to help compensate for losses on the continent . These Loyalists , who included Deveaux and also Lord Dunmore , established plantations on several islands and became a political force in the capital . European Americans were outnumbered by the African-American slaves they brought with them , and ethnic Europeans remained a minority in the territory .
===19th century===
The Slave Trade Act 1807 abolished slave trading to British possessions , including the Bahamas . The United Kingdom pressured other slave-trading countries to also abolish slave-trading , and give the Royal Navy the right to intercept ships carrying slaves on the high seas . Thousands of Africans liberated from slave ships by the Royal Navy were resettled in the Bahamas .
In the 1820s during the period of the Seminole Wars in Florida , hundreds of North American slaves and African Seminoles escaped from Cape Florida to The Bahamas . They settled mostly on northwest Andros Island , where they developed the village of Red Bays . From eyewitness accounts , 300 escaped in a mass flight in 1823 , aided by Bahamians in 27 sloops , with others using canoes for the journey . This was commemorated in 2004 by a large sign at Bill Baggs Cape Florida State Park . Some of their descendants in Red Bays continue African Seminole traditions in basket making and grave marking .
In 1818 , the Home Office in London had ruled that `` any slave brought to The Bahamas from outside the British West Indies would be manumitted . '' This led to a total of nearly 300 enslaved people owned by US nationals being freed from 1830 to 1835 . The American slave ships Comet and Encomium used in the United States domestic coastwise slave trade , were wrecked off Abaco Island in December 1830 and February 1834 , respectively . When wreckers took the masters , passengers and slaves into Nassau , customs officers seized the slaves and British colonial officials freed them , over the protests of the Americans . There were 165 slaves on the Comet and 48 on the Encomium . The United Kingdom finally paid an indemnity to the United States in those two cases in 1855 , under the Treaty of Claims of 1853 , which settled several compensation cases between the two countries .
Slavery was Slavery Abolition Act 1833 on 1 August 1834 . After that British colonial officials freed 78 North American slaves from the Enterprise ( slave ship ) , which went into Bermuda in 1835 ; and 38 from the Hermosa , which wrecked off Abaco Island in 1840 . The most notable case was that of the Creole case in 1841 : as a result of a slave revolt on board , the leaders ordered the US brig to Nassau . It was carrying 135 slaves from Virginia destined for sale in New Orleans . The Bahamian officials freed the 128 slaves who chose to stay in the islands . The Creole case has been described as the `` most successful slave revolt in U.S. history '' .
These incidents , in which a total of 447 enslaved people belonging to US nationals were freed from 1830 to 1842 , increased tension between the United States and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland . They had been co-operating in patrols to suppress the international slave trade . However , worried about the stability of its large domestic slave trade and its value , the United States argued that the United Kingdom should not treat its domestic ships that came to its colonial ports under duress as part of the international trade . The United States worried that the success of the Creole slaves in gaining freedom would encourage more slave revolts on merchant ships .
During the American Civil War of the 1860s , the islands briefly prospered as a focus for blockade runners aiding the Confederate States .
=== Early 20th century===
The early decades of the 20th century were ones of hardship for many Bahamians , characterised by a stagnant economy and widespread poverty . Many eked out a living via subsistence agriculture or fishing .
In August 1940 , the Edward VIII was appointed Governor of the Bahamas . He arrived in the colony with his Wallis Simpson . Although disheartened at the condition of Government House , they `` tried to make the best of a bad situation '' . He did not enjoy the position , and referred to the islands as `` a third-class British colony '' . He opened the small local parliament on 29 October 1940 . The couple visited the `` Out Islands '' that November , on Axel Wenner-Gren 's yacht , which caused controversy ; the British Foreign Office strenuously objected because they had been advised by United States intelligence that Wenner-Gren was a close friend of the Luftwaffe commander Hermann Gring of Nazi Germany .
The Duke was praised at the time for his efforts to combat poverty on the islands . A 1991 biography by Philip Ziegler , however , described him as contemptuous of the Bahamians and other non-European peoples of the Empire . He was praised for his resolution of civil unrest over low wages in Nassau , Bahamas in June 1942 , when there was a `` full-scale riot '' . Ziegler said that the Duke blamed the trouble on `` mischief makers  communists '' and `` men of Central European Jewish descent , who had secured jobs as a pretext for obtaining a deferment of draft '' . The Duke resigned from the post on 16 March 1945.
===Post-Second World War===
Modern political development began after the Second World War . The first political parties were formed in the 1950s , split broadly along ethnic lines  the United Bahamian Party ( UBP ) representing the English-descended Bahamians ( known informally as the 'Bay Street Boys ' ) , and the Progressive Liberal Party ( PLP ) representing the Afro-Bahamian majority .
A new constitution granting The Bahamas internal autonomy went into effect on 7 January 1964 , with Chief Minister Sir Roland Symonette of the UBP becoming the first Premier . In 1967 , Lynden Pindling of the PLP became the first black Premier of the Bahamian colony ; in 1968 , the title of the position was changed to Prime Minister of The Bahamas . In 1968 , Pindling announced that The Bahamas would seek full independence . A new constitution giving The Bahamas increased control over its own affairs was adopted in 1968 . In 1971 , the UBP merged with a disaffected faction of the PLP to form a new party , the Free National Movement ( FNM ) , a de-racialised , centre-right party which aimed to counter the growing power of Pindling 's PLP .
The British House of Lords voted to give The Bahamas its independence on 22 June 1973 . Prince Charles delivered the official documents to Prime Minister of The Bahamas Lynden Pindling , officially declaring The Bahamas a fully independent nation on 10 July 1973 , and this date is now celebrated as the country 's List of national independence days . It joined the Commonwealth of Nations on the same day . Sir Milo Butler was appointed the first Governor-General of The Bahamas governor-general of The Bahamas ( the official representative of Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom ) shortly after independence .
===Post-independence===
Shortly after independence , The Bahamas joined the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank on 22 August 1973 , and later the United Nations on 18 September 1973.
Politically , the first two decades were dominated by Pindling 's PLP , who went on to win a string of electoral victories . Allegations of corruption , links with drug cartels and financial malfeasance within the Bahamian government failed to dent Pindling 's popularity . Meanwhile , the economy underwent a dramatic growth period fueled by the twin pillars of tourism and offshore finance , significantly raising the standard of living on the islands . The Bahamas ' booming economy led to it becoming a beacon for immigrants , most notably from Haiti .
1992 Bahamian general election , Pindling was unseated by Hubert Ingraham of the FNM . Ingraham went on to win the 1997 Bahamian general election , before being defeated 2002 Bahamian general election , when the PLP returned to power under Perry Christie . Ingraham returned to power from 2007 to 2012 , followed by Christie again from 2012 to 2017 . With economic growth faltering , Bahamians re-elected the FNM in 2017 , with Hubert Minnis becoming the fourth prime minister .
In September 2019 , Hurricane Dorian struck the Abaco Islands and Grand Bahama at SaffirSimpson scale # Category 5 intensity , devastating the northwestern Bahamas . The storm inflicted at least United States dollar US $ 7 billion in damages and killed more than 50 people , with 1,300 people still missing .
==Geography==
The Bahamas consists of a List of islands of The Bahamas spread out over some in the Atlantic Ocean , located to the east of Florida in the United States , north of Cuba and Hispaniola and west of the British Overseas Territory of the Turks and Caicos Islands ( with which it forms the Lucayan archipelago ) . It lies between latitudes 20th parallel north 20 and 28th parallel north 28N , and longitudes 72nd meridian west 72 and 80th meridian west 80W and straddles the Tropic of Cancer . There are some 700 islands and 2,400 cays in total ( of which 30 are inhabited ) with a total land area of .
Nassau , Bahamas , capital city of The Bahamas , lies on the island of New Providence ; the other main inhabited islands are Grand Bahama , Eleuthera , Cat Island , Bahamas , Rum Cay , Long Island , Bahamas , San Salvador Island , Ragged Island , Bahamas , Acklins , Crooked Island ( Bahamas ) , Exuma , Berry Islands , Mayaguana , the Bimini islands , Great Abaco and Great Inagua . The largest island is Andros , Bahamas .
All the islands are low and flat , with ridges that usually rise no more than . The highest point in the country is Mount Alvernia ( formerly Como Hill ) on Cat Island at .
The country contains three terrestrial ecoregions : Bahamian dry forests , Bahamian pine mosaic , and Bahamian mangroves . It had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 7.35/10 , ranking it 44th globally out of 172 countries .
===Climate===
According to the Kppen climate classification , the climate of The Bahamas is mostly tropical savannah climate or Aw , with a hot and wet season and a warm and dry season . The low latitude , warm tropical Gulf Stream , and low elevation give The Bahamas a warm and winterless climate .
As with most tropical climates , seasonal rainfall follows the sun , and summer is the wettest season . There is only a difference between the warmest month and coolest month in most of the Bahama islands . Every few decades low temperatures can fall below for a few hours when a severe cold outbreak comes down from the North American mainland , however there has never been a frost or freeze recorded in the Bahamian Islands . Only once in recorded history has snow been seen in the air anywhere in The Bahamas , this occurred in Freeport on 19 January 1977 , when snow mixed with rain was seen in the air for a short time . The Bahamas are often sunny and dry for long periods of time , and average more than 3,000 ; hours or 340 ; days of sunlight annually . Much of the natural vegetation is tropical scrub and cactus and succulents are common in landscapes .
Tropical storms and hurricanes occasionally impact The Bahamas . In 1992 , Hurricane Andrew passed over the northern portions of the islands , and Hurricane Floyd passed near the eastern portions of the islands in 1999 . Hurricane Dorian of 2019 passed over the archipelago at destructive SaffirSimpson scale Category ; 5 strength with sustained winds of and wind gusts up to , becoming the strongest tropical cyclone on record to impact the northwestern islands of Grand Bahama and Great Abaco .
{ class= '' wikitable '' style= '' text-align : center ''
+Average sea temperature in Nassau , Bahamas
-
! Jan
! Feb
! Mar
! Apr
! May
! Jun
! Jul
! Aug
! Sep
! Oct
! Nov
! Dec
-
}
==Geology==
The Bahamas is part of the Lucayan Archipelago , which continues into the Turks and Caicos Islands , the Mouchoir Bank , the Silver Bank , and the Navidad Bank .
The Bahamas Platform , which includes The Bahamas , Southern Florida , Northern Cuba , the Turks and Caicos , and the Blake Plateau , formed about 150 megaannum , not long after the formation of the North Atlantic . The thick limestones , which predominate in The Bahamas , date back to the Cretaceous . These limestones would have been deposited in shallow seas , assumed to be a stretched and thinned portion of the North American Plate . Sediments were forming at about the same rate as the crust below was sinking due to the added weight . Thus , the entire area consisted of a large marine plain with some islands . Then , at about 80 ; Ma , the area became flooded by the Gulf Stream . This resulted in the drowning of the Blake Plateau , the separation of The Bahamas from Cuba and Florida , the separation of the southeastern Bahamas into separate banks , the creation of the Cay Sal Bank , plus the Bahama Banks . Sedimentation from the `` carbonate factory '' of each bank , or atoll , continues today at the rate of about per kyr . Coral reefs form the `` retaining walls '' of these atolls , within which oolites and pellets ( petrology ) form .
Coral growth was greater through the Tertiary ( geology ) , until the start of the ice ages , and hence those deposits are more abundant below a depth of . In fact , an ancient extinct reef exists half a km seaward of the present one , below sea level . Oolites form when oceanic water penetrate the shallow banks , increasing the temperature about and the salinity by 0.5 per cent . Cementation ( geology ) ooids are referred to as grapestone . Additionally , giant stromatolites are found off the Exuma Cays .
Sea level changes resulted in a drop in sea level , causing wind blown oolite to form sand dunes with distinct cross-bedding . Overlapping dunes form oolitic ridges , which become rapidly lithified through the action of rainwater , called eolianite . Most islands have ridges ranging from , though Cat Island has a ridge in height . The land between ridges is conducive to the formation of lakes and swamps .
Solution weathering of the limestone results in a `` Bahamian Karst '' topography . This includes pothole ( geology ) , blue holes such as Dean 's Blue Hole , sinkholes , beachrock such as the Bimini Road ( `` pavements of Atlantis '' ) , caliche , caves due to the lack of rivers , and sea caves . Several blue holes are aligned along the South Andros fault ( geology ) line . Tidal flats and tidal creeks are common , but the more impressive drainage patterns are formed by troughs and canyons such as Great Bahama Canyon with the evidence of turbidity currents and turbidite deposition .
The stratigraphy of the islands consists of the Middle Pleistocene Owl 's Hole formation ( geology ) , overlain by the Late Pleistocene Grotto Beach Formation , and then the Holocene Rice Bay Formation . However , these units are not necessarily stacked on top of each other but can be located laterally . The oldest formation , Owl 's Hole , is capped by a terra rossa ( soil ) paleosoil , as is the Grotto Beach , unless eroded . The Grotto Beach Formation is the most widespread .
==Government and politics==
The Bahamas is a Parliamentary system constitutional monarchy , with the queen of the Bahamas ( Elizabeth II ) as head of state represented locally by a List of Governors-General of the Bahamas governor-general . Political and legal traditions closely follow those of the United Kingdom and the Westminster system . The Bahamas is a member of the Commonwealth of Nations and personal union its [ of state ] with other Commonwealth realms .
The Prime Minister of the Bahamas is the [ of government ] and is the leader of the party with the most seats in the House of Assembly of the Bahamas . Executive ( government ) is exercised by the Cabinet , selected by the prime minister and drawn from his supporters in the House of Assembly . The current governor-general is The Honourable Cornelius A. Smith , and the current List of heads of government of the Bahamas is The Right Honourable The Rt . Hon . Hubert Minnis Member of Parliament .
Legislature is vested in a bicameralism parliament , which consists of a 38-member House of Assembly ( the lower house ) , with members elected from Plurality voting system single-member districts , and a 16-member Parliament of The Bahamas # Senate , with members appointed by the governor-general , including nine on the advice of the Prime Minister , four on the advice of the Leader of the Opposition leader of Her Majesty 's Loyal Opposition , and three on the advice of the prime minister after consultation with the Leader of the Opposition . As under the Westminster system , the prime minister may dissolve Parliament and call a general election at any time within a five-year term .
Constitutional safeguards include freedom of speech , Freedom of the press , Freedom of religion , Freedom of movement and Freedom of association . The Judiciary of the Bahamas is independent of the executive and the legislature . Jurisprudence is based on English law .
===Political culture===
The Bahamas has a two-party system dominated by the centre-left Progressive Liberal Party and the centre-right Free National Movement . A handful of other political parties have been unable to win election to parliament ; these have included the Bahamas Democratic Movement , the Coalition for Democratic Reform , Bahamian Nationalist Party and the Democratic National Alliance ( Bahamas ) .
===Foreign relations===
The Bahamas has strong bilateral relationships with the United States and the United Kingdom , represented by an ambassador in Washington , D.C. and High Commissioner in London . The Bahamas also associates closely with other nations of the Caribbean Community ( CARICOM ) .
The embassy of the United States in Nassau donated $ 3.6 million to the Minister for Disaster Preparedness , Management , and Reconstruction for modular shelters , medical evacuation boats , and construction materials . The donation was made 2 weeks after the one year anniversary of  Hurricane Dorian  .
===Armed forces===
The Bahamanian military is the Royal Bahamaian Defence Force ( RBDF ) , the navy of The Bahamas which includes a land unit called Commando Squadron ( Regiment ) and an Air Wing ( Air Force ) . Under the Defence Act , the RBDF has been mandated , in the name of the Elizabeth II of The Bahamas , to defend The Bahamas , protect its territorial integrity , patrol its waters , provide assistance and relief in times of disaster , maintain order in conjunction with the law enforcement agencies of The Bahamas , and carry out any such duties as determined by the National Security Council . The Defence Force is also a member of the Caribbean Community ( Caricom ) 's Regional Security Task Force .
The RBDF came into existence on 31 March 1980 . Its duties include defending The Bahamas , stopping Illegal drug trade , illegal immigration and poaching , and providing assistance to mariners . The Defence Force has a fleet of 26 coastal and inshore patrol craft along with 3 aircraft and over 1,100 personnel including 65 officers and 74 women .
===Administrative divisions===
The districts of The Bahamas provide a system of local government everywhere except New Providence ( which holds 70 percent of the national population ) , whose affairs are handled directly by the central government . In 1996 , the Bahamian Parliament passed the `` Local Government Act '' to facilitate the establishment of family island administrators , local government districts , local district councillors and local town committees for the various island communities . The overall goal of this act is to allow the various elected leaders to govern and oversee the affairs of their respective districts without the interference of the central government . In total , there are 32 districts , with elections being held every five years . There are 110 councillors and 281 town committee members elected to represent the various districts .
Each councillor or town committee member is responsible for the proper use of public funds for the maintenance and development of their constituency .
The districts other than New Providence are :
===National flag===
The Bahamian flag was adopted in 1973 . Its colours symbolise the strength of the Bahamian people ; its design reflects aspects of the natural environment ( sun and sea ) and economic and social development . The flag is a black equilateral triangle against the mast , superimposed on a horizontal background made up of three equal stripes of aquamarine , gold and aquamarine .
===Coat of arms===
The coat of arms of The Bahamas contains a shield with the national symbols as its focal point . The shield is supported by a marlin and a flamingo , which are the national animals of The Bahamas . The flamingo is located on the land , and the marlin on the sea , indicating the geography of the islands .
On top of the shield is a conch shell , which represents the varied marine life of the island chain . The conch shell rests on a helmet . Below this is the actual shield , the main symbol of which is a ship representing the Santa Maria ( ship ) of Christopher Columbus , shown sailing beneath the sun . Along the bottom , below the shield appears a banner upon which is the national motto :
`` Forward , Upward , Onward Together . ''
===National flower===
The national flower of The Bahamas is the Tecoma stans , as it is endemic to the Bahama islands and it blooms throughout the year .
Selection of the yellow elder over many other flowers was made through the combined popular vote of members of all four of New Providence 's garden clubs of the 1970sthe Nassau Garden Club , the Carver Garden Club , the International Garden Club and the YWCA Garden Club . They reasoned that other flowers grown theresuch as the bougainvillea , [ and Delonix regia poinciana ] had already been chosen as the national flowers of other countries . The yellow elder , on the other hand , was unclaimed by other countries ( although it is now also the national flower of the [ [ United States Virgin Islands ) and also the yellow elder is native to the family islands .
==Economy==
By the terms of Lists of countries by GDP per capita , The Bahamas is one of the richest countries in the Americas . Its currency ( the Bahamian dollar ) is kept at a 1-to-1 currency peg with the US dollar .
===Tourism===
The Bahamas relies heavily on tourism to generate most of its economic activity . Tourism as an industry not only accounts for about 50 % of the Bahamian GDP , but also provides jobs for about half of the country 's workforce . The Bahamas attracted 5.8 ; million visitors in 2012 , more than 70 % of whom were cruise visitors .
===Financial services===
After tourism , the next most important economic sector is banking and Offshore financial centre , accounting for some 15 % of GDP . It was revealed in the Panama Papers that The Bahamas is the jurisdiction with the most offshore entities or companies in the world .
The economy has a very competitive tax regime ( classified by some as a tax haven ) . The government derives its revenue from import tariffs , VAT , licence fees , property and stamp taxes , but there is no income tax , corporate tax , capital gains tax , or wealth tax . Payroll taxes fund social insurance benefits and amount to 3.9 % paid by the employee and 5.9 % paid by the employer . In 2010 , overall tax revenue as a percentage of GDP was 17.2 % .
===Agriculture , natural resources , and manufacturing===
Agriculture and manufacturing form the third largest sector of the Bahamian economy , representing 57 % of total GDP . An estimated 80 % of the Bahamian food supply is imported . Major crops include onions , okra , tomatoes , Orange ( fruit ) , grapefruit , cucumbers , sugar cane , lemons , Lime ( fruit ) , and sweet potatoes .
Access to biocapacity in the Bahamas is much higher than world average . In 2016 , the Bahamas had 9.2 global hectares of biocapacity per person within its territory , much more than the world average of 1.6 global hectares per person . In 2016 the Bahamas used 3.7 global hectares of biocapacity per person - their ecological footprint of consumption . This means they use less biocapacity than the Bahamas contains . As a result , the Bahamas is running a biocapacity reserve .
==Demographics==
The Bahamas has an estimated population of , of which 25.9 % are 14 or under , 67.2 % 15 to 64 and 6.9 % over 65 . It has a population growth rate of 0.925 % ( 2010 ) , with a birth rate of 17.81/1,000 population , death rate of 9.35/1,000 , and net migration rate of 2.13 migrant ( s ) /1,000 population . The infant mortality rate is 23.21 deaths/1,000 live births . Residents have a life expectancy at birth of 69.87 years : 73.49 years for females , 66.32 years for males . The total fertility rate is 2.0 children born/woman ( 2010 ) .
The most populous islands are New Providence , where Nassau , Bahamas , the capital and largest city , is located ; and Grand Bahama , home to the second largest city of Freeport , Bahamas .
===Racial and ethnic groups===
According to the 99 % response rate obtained from the race question on the 2010 Census questionnaire , 90.6 % of the population identified themselves as being Afro-Bahamians , 4.7 % White Bahamians and 2.1 % of a Mulatto ( African and European ) . Three centuries prior , in 1722 when the first official census of The Bahamas was taken , 74 % of the population was native European and 26 % native African .
Since the colonial era of plantations , Africans or Afro-Bahamians have been the largest ethnic group in The Bahamas , whose primary ancestry was based in West Africa . The first Africans to arrive to The Bahamas were freed slaves from Bermuda ; they arrived with the Eleutheran Adventurers looking for new lives .
The Haitians community in The Bahamas is also largely of African descent and numbers about 80,000 . Due to an extremely high immigration of Haitians to The Bahamas , the Bahamian government started deporting illegal Haitian immigrants to their homeland in late 2014.
The white Bahamian population are mainly the descendants of the Puritan and Loyalist ( American Revolution ) escaping the Revolutionary War ( United States ) who arrived in 1649 and 1783 , respectively . Many Southern Loyalists went to the Abaco Islands , half of whose population was of European descent as of 1985 . The term white is usually used to identify Bahamians with Anglo ancestry , as well as `` light-skinned '' Afro-Bahamians . Sometimes Bahamians use the term Conch ( people ) to describe people of Anglo descent .
A small portion of the Euro-Bahamian population are Greek Bahamians , descended from Greece labourers who came to help develop the sponging industry in the 1900s . They make up less than 2 % of the nation 's population , but have still preserved their distinct Greek Bahamians culture .
Bahamians typically identify themselves simply as either black or white .
===Religion===
The islands ' population is predominantly Christians . Protestant denominations collectively account for more than 70 % of the population , with Baptists representing 35 % of the population , Anglicans 15 % , Pentecostals 8 % , Church of God ( Holiness ) 5 % , Seventh-day Adventists 5 % and Methodists 4 % . There is also a significant Roman Catholic community accounting for about 14 % . There are also smaller communities of Jews , Muslims , Bah Faith , Hindus , Rastafarians and practitioners of traditional African religions such as Obeah .
===Languages===
The official language of The Bahamas is English . Many people speak an English-based creole languages English-based creole language called Bahamian dialect ( known simply as `` dialect '' ) or `` Bahamianese '' . Laurente Gibbs , a Bahamian writer and actor , was the first to coin the latter name in a poem and has since promoted its usage . Both are used as autoglossonyms . Haitian Creole , a French-based creole languages French-based creole language is spoken by Haitians and their descendants , who make up of about 25 % of the total population . It is known simply as Creole to differentiate it from Bahamian English .
==Culture==
The culture of the islands is a mixture of African ( Afro-Bahamians being the largest ethnicity ) , British ( as the former colonial power ) and American ( as the dominant country in the region and source of most tourists ) .
A form of African-based folk magic ( obeah ) is practised by some Bahamians , mainly in the Family Islands ( out-islands ) of The Bahamas . The practice of obeah is illegal in The Bahamas and punishable in law .
In the less developed outer islands ( or Family Islands ) , handicrafts include basketry made from palm fronds . This material , commonly called `` straw '' , is plaited into hats and bags that are popular tourist items . Another use is for so-called `` Voodoo dolls '' , even though such dolls are the result of foreign influences and not based in historic fact .
Junkanoo is a traditional Afro-Bahamian street parade of 'rushing ' , music , dance and art held in Nassau ( and a few other settlements ) every Boxing Day and New Year 's Day . Junkanoo is also used to celebrate other holidays and events such as Emancipation Day .
Regattas are important social events in many family island settlements . They usually feature one or more days of sailing by old-fashioned Boat , as well as an onshore festival .
Many dishes are associated with Bahamian cuisine , which reflects Caribbean , African and European influences . Some settlements have festivals associated with the traditional crop or food of that area , such as the `` Pineapple Fest '' in Gregory Town , Eleuthera or the `` Crab Fest '' on Andros . Other significant traditions include story telling .
Bahamians have created a rich literature of poetry , short stories , plays and short fictional works . Common themes in these works are ( 1 ) an awareness of change , ( 2 ) a striving for sophistication , ( 3 ) a search for identity , ( 4 ) nostalgia for the old ways and ( 5 ) an appreciation of beauty . Some major writers are Susan Wallace , Percival Miller , Robert Johnson , Raymond Brown , O.M . Smith , William Johnson , Eddie Minnis and Winston Saunders .
Bahamas culture is rich with beliefs , traditions , folklore and legend . The best-known folklore and legends in The Bahamas include the lusca and chickcharney creatures of Andros , Pretty Molly on Exuma Bahamas and the Lost City of Atlantis on Bimini Bahamas .
===Sport===
Sport is a significant part of Bahamian culture . The national sport is cricket . Cricket has been played in The Bahamas from 1846 , the oldest sport being played in the country today . The Bahamas Cricket Association was formed in 1936 , and from the 1940s to the 1970s , cricket was played amongst many Bahamians . Bahamas is not a part of the West Indies Cricket Board , so players are not eligible to play for the West Indies cricket team . The late 1970s saw the game begin to decline in the country as teachers , who had previously come from the United Kingdom with a passion for cricket , were replaced by teachers who had been trained in the United States . The Bahamian physical education teachers had no knowledge of the game and instead taught track and field , basketball , baseball , softball , volleyball and Association football where primary and high schools compete against each other . Today cricket is still enjoyed by a few locals and immigrants in the country , usually from Jamaica , Guyana , Haiti and Barbados . Cricket is played on Saturdays and Sundays at Windsor Park and Haynes Oval .
The only other sporting event that began before cricket was [ racing ] , which started in 1796 . The most popular spectator sports are those imported from the United States , such as basketball , American football , and baseball , rather than from the British Isles , due to the country 's close proximity to the United States , unlike their other Caribbean counterparts , where cricket , Rugby football , and netball have proven to be more popular .
Dexter Cambridge , Rick Fox , Ian Lockhart , Magnum Rolle , Buddy Hield and Deandre Ayton are a few Bahamians who joined Bahamian Mychal Thompson of the Los Angeles Lakers in the NBA ranks . Over the years American football has become much more popular than soccer , though not implemented in the high school system yet . Leagues for teens and adults have been developed by the Bahamas American Football Federation . However soccer , as it is commonly known in the country , is still a very popular sport amongst high school pupils . Leagues are governed by the Bahamas Football Association . Recently , the Bahamian government has been working closely with Tottenham Hotspur of London to promote the sport in the country as well as promoting The Bahamas in the European market . In 2013 , 'Spurs ' became the first Premier League club to play an exhibition match in The Bahamas , facing the Jamaica national football team . Joe Lewis ( British businessman ) , the owner of the club , is based in The Bahamas .
Other popular sports are Swimming ( sport ) , tennis and boxing , where Bahamians have enjoyed some degree of success at the international level . Other sports such as golf , rugby league , rugby union , beach soccer , and netball are considered growing sports . Athletics ( sport ) , commonly known as 'track and field ' in the country , is the most successful sport by far amongst Bahamians . Bahamians have a strong tradition in the Sprint ( running ) and jumps . Track and field is probably the most popular spectator sport in the country next to basketball due to their success over the years . Triathlons are gaining popularity in Nassau and the Family Islands .
Durward Knowles was a sailor and Olympic champion from The Bahamas . He won the gold medal in the Star class at the 1964 Summer Olympics in Tokyo , together with Cecil Cooke . He won the bronze medal in the same class at the 1956 Summer Olympics in Melbourne along with Sloane Elmo Farrington . He had previously competed for the United Kingdom in the 1948 Olympics , finishing in 4th place in the Star class again with Sloane Elmo Farrington . Representing The Bahamas , Knowles won gold in the 1959 Pan American Games star class ( with Farrington ) . He is one of only five athletes who have competed in the Olympics over a span of 40 years .
Bahamians have gone on to win numerous track and field medals at the Olympic Games , IAAF World Championships in Athletics , Commonwealth Games and Pan American Games . Frank Rutherford is the first athletics Olympic medallist for the country . He won a bronze medal for triple jump during the 1992 Summer Olympics . Pauline Davis-Thompson , Debbie Ferguson , Chandra Sturrup , Savatheda Fynes and Eldece Clarke-Lewis teamed up for the first athletics Olympic gold medal for the country when they won the 4 ;  ; 100 ; m relay at the 2000 Summer Olympics . They are affectionately known as the `` Golden Girls '' . Tonique Williams-Darling became the first athletics individual Olympic gold medallist when she won the 400 metres 400-metre sprint in 2004 Summer Olympics . In 2007 , with the disqualification of Marion Jones , Pauline Davis-Thompson was advanced to the gold medal position in the Athletics at the 2000 Summer Olympics  Women 's 200 metres , predating William-Darling .
The Bahamas were hosts of the first men 's senior FIFA tournament to be staged in the Caribbean , the 2017 FIFA Beach Soccer World Cup . The Bahamas also hosted the first 3 editions of the IAAF World Relays .
==Education==
According to 2011 estimates , 95 % of the Bahamian adult population are literate .
The University of the Bahamas ( UB ) is the national higher education/tertiary system . Offering baccalaureate , masters and associate degrees , UB has three campuses , and teaching and research centres throughout The Bahamas . The University of the Bahamas was chartered on 10 November 2.
==Transport==
The Bahamas contains about of paved roads . Inter-island transport is conducted primarily via ship and air . The country has 61 airports , the chief of which are Lynden Pindling International Airport on New Providence , Grand Bahama International Airport on Grand Bahama Island and Marsh Harbour Airport Leonard M. Thompson International Airport ( formerly Marsh Harbour Airport ) on Abaco Island .
==See also==
* Outline of the Bahamas
* Index of Bahamas-related articles
== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
*
*
== Further reading ==
===General history===
* Cash Philip et al . ( Don Maples , Alison Packer ) . The Making of The Bahamas : A History for Schools . London : Collins , 1978.
* Miller , Hubert W. The Colonization of The Bahamas , 16471670 , The William and Mary Quarterly 2 no.1 ( January 1945 ) : 3346 .
* Craton , Michael . A History of The Bahamas . London : Collins , 1962.
* Craton , Michael and Saunders , Gail . Islanders in the Stream : A History of the Bahamian People . Athens : University of Georgia Press , 1992
* Collinwood , Dean . `` Columbus and the Discovery of Self , '' Weber Studies , Vol . 9 No . 3 ( Fall ) 1992 : 2944 .
* Dodge , Steve . Abaco : The History of an Out Island and its Cays , Tropic Isle Publications , 1983.
* Dodge , Steve . The Compleat Guide to Nassau , White Sound Press , 1987.
* Boultbee , Paul G. The Bahamas . Oxford : ABC-Clio Press , 1990.
* Wood , David E. , comp. , A Guide to Selected Sources to the History of the Seminole Settlements of Red Bays , Andros , 18171980 , Nassau : Department of Archives
===Economic history===
* Johnson , Howard . The Bahamas in Slavery and Freedom . Kingston : Ian Randle Publishing , 1991.
* Johnson , Howard . The Bahamas from Slavery to Servitude , 17831933 . Gainesville : University of Florida Press , 1996.
* Alan A . Block . Masters of Paradise , New Brunswick and London , Transaction Publishers , 1998.
* Storr , Virgil H. Enterprising Slaves and Master Pirates : Understanding Economic Life in the Bahamas . New York : Peter Lang ( publishing company ) , 2004.
===Social history===
* Johnson , Wittington B . Race Relations in the Bahamas , 17841834 : The Nonviolent Transformation from a Slave to a Free Society , Fayetteville : University of Arkansas , 2000.
* Shirley , Paul . `` Tek Force Wid Force '' , History Today 54 , no . 41 ( April 2004 ) : 3035 .
* Saunders , Gail . The Social Life in the Bahamas 1880s1920s . Nassau : Media Publishing , 1996.
* Saunders , Gail . Bahamas Society After Emancipation . Kingston : Ian Randle Publishing , 1990.
* Curry , Jimmy . Filthy Rich Gangster/First Bahamian Movie . Movie Mogul Pictures : 1996.
* Curry , Jimmy . To the Rescue/First Bahamian Rap/Hip Hop Song . Royal Crown Records , 1985.
* Collinwood , Dean . The Bahamas Between Worlds , White Sound Press , 1989.
* Collinwood , Dean and Steve Dodge . Modern Bahamian Society , Caribbean Books , 1989.
* Dodge , Steve , Robert McIntire and Dean Collinwood . The Bahamas Index , White Sound Press , 1989.
* Collinwood , Dean . `` The Bahamas , '' in The Whole World Handbook 19921995 , 12th ed. , New York : St. Martin 's Press , 1994.
* Collinwood , Dean . `` The Bahamas , '' chapters in Jack W. Hopkins , ed. , Latin American and Caribbean Contemporary Record , Vols . 1,2,3,4 , Holmes and Meier Publishers , 1983 , 1984 , 1985 , 1986.
* Collinwood , Dean . `` Problems of Research and Training in Small Islands with a Social Science Faculty , '' in Social Science in Latin America and the Caribbean , UNESCO , No . 48 , 1982.
* Collinwood , Dean and Rick Phillips , `` The National Literature of the New Bahamas , '' Weber Studies , Vol.7 , No . 1 ( Spring ) 1990 : 4362 .
* Collinwood , Dean . `` Writers , Social Scientists and Sexual Norms in the Caribbean , '' Tsuda Review , No . 31 ( November ) 1986 : 4557 .
* Collinwood , Dean . `` Terra Incognita : Research on the Modern Bahamian Society , '' Journal of Caribbean Studies , Vol . 1 , Nos . 23 ( Winter ) 1981 : 284297 .
* Collinwood , Dean and Steve Dodge . `` Political Leadership in the Bahamas '' , The Bahamas Research Institute , No.1 , May 1987.
==External links==
*
*
* Bahamas . The World Factbook . Central Intelligence Agency .
* The Bahamas from UCB Libraries GovPubs
*
* The Bahamas from the BBC News
* Key Development Forecasts for The Bahamas from International Futures
* Maps of the Bahamas from the American Geographical Society Library
* The Nassau Guardian newspaper , 18491922 , as Open Access from the Digital Library of the Caribbean
Category : The Bahamas
Category : Countries in the Caribbean
Category : Archipelagoes of the Atlantic Ocean
Category : English-speaking countries and territories
Category : Member states of the Commonwealth of Nations
Category : Member states of the Caribbean Community
Category : Member states of the United Nations
Category : Small Island Developing States
Category : Former English colonies
Category : Populated places established in 1647
Category:1647 establishments in North America
Category:1647 establishments in the British Empire
Category : States and territories established in 1973
Category:1973 establishments in North America
Category:1970s establishments in the Caribbean
Category : Countries in North America
Category : Island countries <article_end> <article_start>  
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines ( ) , also frequently Pars pro toto # Geography Saint Vincent , is an island country in the Caribbean . It 's located in the southeast Windward Islands of the Lesser Antilles , which lies in the West Indies at the southern end of the eastern border of the Caribbean Sea where the latter meets the Atlantic Ocean .
Its territory consists of the main island of Saint Vincent ( Antilles ) and the northern two-thirds of the Grenadines , a chain of 32 smaller islands . Some of the Grenadines are inhabited ;  Bequia , Mustique , Union Island , Canouan , Petit Saint Vincent , Palm Island , Grenadines , Mayreau , Young Island ( Grenadines ) ;  while others are not : Tobago Cays , Baliceaux , Battowia , Quatre , Petite Mustique , Savan ( island ) and Petit Nevis . Most of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines lies within the Hurricane Alley .
To the north of Saint Vincent lies Saint Lucia , to the east is Barbados , and Grenada lies to the south . Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is a densely populated country for its size ( over 300 inhabitants/km2 ) with approximately inhabitants .
Kingstown is the capital and main port . Saint Vincent has a British Empire history , and is now part of the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States , Caribbean Community , the Commonwealth of Nations , the Bolivarian Alliance for the Americas and the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States ( CELAC ) .
==Etymology==
Christopher Columbus , the first European to reach the island , named it after St. Vincent of Saragossa , whose feast day it was on the day Columbus first saw it ( 22 January 1498 ) . The name of the Grenadines refers to the Spanish city of Granada , but to differentiate it from the island of the same name , the diminutive was used . Before the arrival of the Spaniards , the Carib natives who inhabited the island of St. Vincent called it Youloumain , in honour of Youlouca , the spirit of the rainbows , who they believed inhabited the island .
==History==
===Pre-colonial period===
Before the arrival of Europeans and Africans in the 16th century , various Amerindian groups passed through or settled on St. Vincent and the Grenadines , including the Ciboney , Arawaks , and Island Caribs people . The island now known as Saint Vincent was originally named Youloumain by the native Island Caribs who called themselves Kalina/Carina ( `` l '' and `` r '' being pronounced the same in their language ) .
=== European arrival and early colonial period ===
It is thought that Christopher Columbus sighted the island in 1498 , giving it the name St Vincent . The indigenous Garifuna people , who became known as the `` Black Caribs '' , aggressively prevented European settlement on Saint Vincent .
=== French and British colonisation and the First Carib War ===
Various attempts by the English and Dutch to claim the island proved unsuccessful , and it was the French who were first able to colonise the island , settling in the town of Barrouallie on the leeward side of St Vincent in 1719 . The French brought with them enslaved African prisoners of war to work the plantations of sugar , coffee , indigo , tobacco , cotton and cocoa .
The British captured the island and drove out the French from Barrouallie during the Seven Years ' War , a claim confirmed with the Treaty of Paris ( 1763 ) . On taking control of the island in 1763 , the British laid the foundations of Fort Charlotte , Saint Vincent and also brought with them enslaved African prisoners of war to work on the island plantations . The Black Caribs however , opposed to the British presence , went into open conflict against the British , starting the First Carib War which lasted from 1772 to 1773.
During the Anglo-French War ( 17781783 ) the French French capture of Saint Vincent in 1779 . However , the British regained control under the Treaty of Versailles ( 1783 ) .
=== British colonial period and the Second Carib War ===
The uneasy peace between the British and the Black Caribs led to the Second Carib War , which lasted from 1795 to 1796 . The Black Caribs were led by Garifuna Paramount Chief Joseph Chatoyer and they were supported by the French , notably the radical Victor Hugues from the island of Martinique . Their revolt and uprising was eventually put to an end in 1797 by British General Sir Ralph Abercromby ; a peace treaty agreement was made which resulted in almost 5,000 Black Caribs being exiled to Roatn , an island off the coast of Honduras , and to Belize and Baliceaux in the Grenadines .
In 1806 the building of Fort Charlotte was completed .
The volcano La Soufrire ( volcano ) erupted in 1812 , resulting in considerable destruction
The British abolitionism in the United Kingdom slavery in Saint Vincent ( as well as in the other British West Indies colonies ) in 1834 , and an apprenticeship period followed which ended in 1838 . After its end , labour shortages on the plantations resulted , and this was initially addressed by the immigration of indentured servants ; in the late 1840s many Portuguese immigrants arrived from Madeira and between 1861 and 1888 shiploads of Indian labourers arrived . Conditions remained harsh for both former slaves and immigrant agricultural workers , as depressed world sugar prices kept the economy stagnant until the turn of the century . The economy then went into a period of decline with many landowners abandoning their estates and leaving the land to be cultivated by liberated slaves .
The Opobo king Jaja of Opobo of Nigeria was exiled to after his 1887 arrest by the British for shipping cargoes of palm oil directly to Liverpool without the intermediation of the National African Company .
===20th century===
In 1902 , the volcano Soufrire ( volcano ) erupted , killing 1,5002,000 people ; much farmland was damaged , and the economy deteriorated .
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines passed through various stages of colonial status under the British . A representative assembly was authorised in 1776 , Crown Colony government was installed in 1877 , a legislative council was created in 1925 with a limited franchise , and Universal suffrage was granted in 1951 . During the period of its control of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines , Britain made several attempts to unify the island with other Windward Islands as a single entity , with the aim of simplifying British control in that sub-region through a single unified administration . In the 1960s , the British again tried to unify all of its regional islands including Saint Vincent into one united single entity under British control , unified politically . The unification was to be called the West Indies Federation and was driven by a desire to gain independence from British government . However , the attempt collapsed in 1962.
Saint Vincent was granted `` associate statehood '' status by Britain on 27 October 1969 . This gave Saint Vincent complete control over its own internal affairs but was short of full independence in law .
In April 1979 La Soufrire erupted again . Although no one was killed , thousands were evacuated and again there was extensive agricultural damage .
On 27 October 1979 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines became the last of the Windward Islands to gain full independence , and this date is now the country 's List of national independence days , a Public holidays in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines . The country opted to remain within the British Commonwealth , retaining Queen Elizabeth as Monarchy of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines , represented locally by a Governor-General of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Governor-General .
===Post-independence era===
Milton Cato of the centre-left Saint Vincent Labour Party ( SVLP ) was the country 's first Prime Minister ( he had been Premier since 1974 ) , ruling until he was defeated in the 1984 Vincentian general election by James Fitz-Allen Mitchell of the centre-right New Democratic Party ( Saint Vincent and the Grenadines ) ( NDP ) . During Cato 's time in office there was a brief rebellion on Union Island in December 1979 led by Lennox 'Bumba ' Charles ; apparently inspired by the recent revolution on Grenada , Charles alleged neglect of Union by the central government . However , the revolt was swiftly put down and Charles arrested . There were also a series of strikes in the early 1980s . James Mitchell remained Prime Minister for 16 years until 2000 , winning three consecutive Elections in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines . Mitchell was at the forefront of attempts to improve regional integration . In Hurricane Allen and 1987 hurricanes damaged many banana and coconut plantations . Hurricane seasons were also very active in 1998 and 1999 , with Hurricane Lenny in 1999 causing extensive damage to the west coast of the island .
In 2000 Arnhim Eustace became Prime Minister after taking over the leadership of the NDP following Mitchell 's retirement ; he was 2001 Vincentian general election a year later by Ralph Gonsalves of the Unity Labour Party ( the successor party to the SVLP ) . Gonsalvesa left-winger known in the country as `` Comrade Ralph '' has argued that European nations owe Caribbean nations Reparations for slavery for their role in the Atlantic slave trade . Gonsalves won a second term in 2005 , a third term in 2010 , and a fourth term in 2015.
In 2009 , Vincentian constitutional referendum , 2009 that would make the country a republic , replacing Queen Elizabeth II as head of state with a non-executive President , a proposal supported by Prime Minister Gonsalves . A two-thirds majority was required , and it was defeated by 29,019 votes ( 55.64 per cent ) to 22,493 ( 43.13 per cent ) .
==Geography==
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines lies to the west of Barbados , south of Saint Lucia and north of Grenada in the Windward Islands of the Lesser Antilles , an island arc of the Caribbean Sea . The islands of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines include the main island of Saint Vincent ( island ) and the northern two-thirds of the Grenadines , which are a chain of smaller islands stretching south from Saint Vincent to Grenada . There are 32 islands and cays that make up St Vincent and the Grenadines ( SVG ) . Nine are inhabited , including the mainland St Vincent and the Grenadines islands : Young Island , Bequia , Mustique , Canouan , Union Island , Mayreau , Petit St Vincent and Palm Island . Prominent uninhabited islands of the Grenadines include Petit Nevis , used by Whaling , and Petite Mustique , which was the centre of a prominent real-estate scam in the early 2000s .
The capital of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is Kingstown , Saint Vincent . The main island of Saint Vincent measures long , in width and in area . From the most northern to the most southern points , the Grenadine islands belonging to Saint Vincent span , with a combined area of .
The island of Saint Vincent is volcanic and heavily forested , and includes little level ground . The windward side of the island is very rocky and steep , while the leeward side has more sandy beaches and bays . Saint Vincent 's highest peak is Soufrire ( volcano ) volcano at . Other major mountains on St Vincent are ( from north to south ) Richmond Peak , St Vincent , Mount Brisbane , Colonarie Mountain , Grand Bonhomme , Petit Bonhomme , St Vincent and Mount St Andrew .
The country is home to three terrestrial ecoregions : Windward Islands moist forests , Leeward Islands dry forests , and Windward Islands dry forests . It had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 6.95/10 , ranking it 61st globally out of 172 countries .
==Government and politics==
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is a parliamentary democracy and Commonwealth realm , with Elizabeth II as Queen of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines . She does not reside in the islands and is represented as [ of state ] in the country by the Governor-General of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines , currently Susan Dougan ( since 1 August 2019 ) .
The office of Governor-General has mostly ceremonial functions including the opening of the islands ' House of Assembly of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and the appointment of various government officials . Control of the government rests with the elected List of prime ministers of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and his or her cabinet . The current Prime Minister is Ralph Gonsalves , elected in 2001 as head of the Unity Labour Party .
The legislative branch of government is the unicameral House of Assembly of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines , seating 15 elected members representing single-member electoral district and six appointed members known as Senators . The parliamentary term of office is five years , although the Prime Minister may call elections at any time .
The judicial branch of government is divided into district courts , the Eastern Caribbean Supreme Court and the Privy Council in London being the court of last resort .
=== Political culture ===
The two political parties with parliamentary representation are the New Democratic Party ( Saint Vincent and the Grenadines ) ( NDP ) and the Unity Labour Party ( ULP ) . The parliamentary opposition is made up of the largest minority stakeholder in the general elections , headed by the Opposition ( parliamentary ) . The current opposition leader is Godwin Friday .
=== Military ===
Saint Vincent has no formal armed forces , although the Royal Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Police Force includes a Special Service Unit as well as a militia that has a supporting role on the island .
In 2017 , Saint Vincent signed the UN treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons .
===Administrative divisions===
Administratively , Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is divided into six parish ( country subdivision ) . Five parishes are on Saint Vincent , while the sixth is made up of the Grenadine islands . Kingstown is located in the Parish of Saint George and is the capital city and central administrative centre of the country .
===LGBT rights===
Acts of gross indecency , which may be defined to include [ activity ] , are illegal in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines . Section 148 of the Criminal Code states :
Any person , who in public or private , commits an act of gross indecency with another person of the same sex , or procures or attempts to procure another person of the same sex to commit an act of gross indecency with him or her , is guilty of an offence and liable to imprisonment for five years .
== Foreign relations ==
===International and regional relationships===
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines maintains close ties to Canada , the United Kingdom and the United States , and cooperates with regional political and economic organisations such as the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States ( OECS ) and CARICOM . The island nation 's sixth embassy overseas was opened on 8 August 2019 in Taipei , after Prime Minister Ralph Gonsalves ' official visit to the Republic of China ; the other five are located in London , Washington D.C. , Havana , Caracas and Brussels .
====The Double Taxation Relief ( CARICOM ) Treaty====
On 6 July 1994 at Sherbourne Conference Centre , St Michael , Barbados , as a representative of the Government of St. Vincent and the Grenadines , then ( James Mitchell , who was subsequently knighted ) signed the Double Taxation Relief ( CARICOM ) Treaties . There were seven other signatories to the agreement on that day . The countries which were represented were Antigua and Barbuda , Belize , Grenada , Jamaica , St Kitts and Nevis , St Lucia , and Trinidad and Tobago .
An eighth country signed the agreement on 19 August 2016 , Guyana .
This treaty covered taxes , residence , tax jurisdictions , capital gains , business profits , interest , dividends , royalties and other areas .
====FATCA====
On 30 June 2014 , St. Vincent and the Grenadines signed a Model 1 agreement with the United States of America with respect to Foreign Account Tax Compliance ( Act ) or FATCA .
According to the updated site as of 16 January 2017 , on 13 May 2016 the agreement went to `` In Force '' status .
====International and regional bodies to which St. Vincent and the Grenadines belong====
St Vincent and the Grenadines is a member of the United Nations , the Commonwealth of Nations , the Organization of American States , and the Association of Caribbean States ( ACS ) .
In September 2017 , at the Seventy-second session of the United Nations General Assembly , the Prime Ministers of the Solomon Islands , Tuvalu , Vanuatu and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines called for UN action on alleged human rights abuses committed on Western New Guinea 's indigenous Papuans . Western New Guinea has been occupied by Indonesia since 1963 . More than 100,000 Papuans have died during a 50-year Papua conflict .
====Organisation of American States====
The Charter of the OAS was signed in Bogot in 1948 and was amended by several Protocols which were named after the city and the year in which the Protocol was signed , such as `` Managua '' in `` 1993 '' forming part of the name of the Protocol .
St Vincent and the Grenadines entered the OAS system on 27 October 1981 according to the OAS website .
=====Summits of the Americas=====
The last Summits of the Americas , the seventh , was held in Panama City , Panama in 2015 with the eighth summit being held in Lima , Peru in 2018 according to the website of the Summits of Americas .
=====Indigenous Leaders Summits of Americas ( ILSA ) =====
With St Vincent and the Grenadines having at least two groups of indigenous persons it is expected that there will be contributions from the SVG 's on this topic at the next ILSAs .
The position of the OAS with respect to indigenous persons appears to be developing over the years . The following statements appear to capture the position of the OAS with respect to the ILSA : `` The OAS has supported and participated in the organisation of Indigenous Leaders Summits of Americas ( ILSA ) '' according to the OAS 's website . The most recent `` statement made by the Heads of State of the hemisphere was in the Declaration of Commitments of Port of Spain in 2009  Paragraph 86 according to the OAS 's website . ''
The Draft American Declaration of the Rights of the Indigenous Persons appear to be a working document . The last `` Meeting for Negotiations in the Quest for Consensus on this area appeared to be Meeting Number ( 18 ) eighteen and is listed as being held in May 2015 according to the website . ''
===European nations===
In 2013 , Saint Vincent called for European nations to pay reparations for the Slavery .
===Venezuela===
Saint Vincent protests against Venezuela 's claim to give full effect to Aves ( Bird ) Island , which creates a Venezuelan EEZ/continental shelf extending over a large portion of the Caribbean Sea .
==Economy==
Agriculture , dominated by banana production , is the most important sector of this lower-middle-income economy . The services sector , based mostly on a growing tourist industry , is also important . The government has been relatively unsuccessful at introducing new industries , and the unemployment rate remains high at 19.8 % in the 1991 census to 15 % in 2001 . The continuing dependence on a single crop represents the biggest obstacle to the islands ' development as tropical storms wiped out substantial portions of bananas in many years .
There is a small manufacturing sector and a small offshore financial sector serving international businesses , and its secrecy laws have caused some international concern . There are increasing demands for international financial services like stock exchange and financial intermediaries financial activities in the country . In addition , the natives of Bequia are permitted to hunt up to four [ whale ] s per year under International Whaling Commission subsistence quotas .
=== Tourism ===
The tourism sector has considerable potential for development . The recent filming of the Pirates of the Caribbean films movies on the island has helped to expose the country to more potential visitors and investors . Recent growth has been stimulated by strong activity in the construction sector and an improvement in tourism .
=== Transportation ===
Argyle International Airport is the country 's new international airport . The new facility opened on 14 February 2017 , replacing the existing E.T . Joshua Airport . The airport is on the island 's east coast about 8.3 ; km ( 5.17 miles ) from Kingstown .
===Communications===
In 2010 , Saint Vincent and the Grenadines had 21,700 telephone land lines . Its land telephone system is fully automatic and covers the entire island and all of the inhabited Grenadine islands . In 2002 , there were 10,000 mobile phones . By 2010 , this number had increased to 131,800 . Mobile phone service is available in most areas of Saint Vincent as well as the Grenadines .
Saint Vincent has two ISPs ( Digicel , Flow ( brand ) ) that provide cellular telephone and internet service .
==Demographics==
The population as estimated in was . The ethnic composition was 66 % African descent , 19 % of mixed descent , 6 % East Indian , 4 % Europeans ( mainly Portuguese ) , 2 % Island Carib and 3 % others . Most Vincentians are the descendants of sub-Saharan Africa people brought to the island to work on plantations . There are other ethnic groups such as Portuguese people ( from Madeira ) and East Indians , both brought in to work on the plantations after the abolishing of slavery by the British living on the island . There is also a growing Chinese population .
===Languages===
English is the official language . Most Vincentians speak Vincentian Creole . English is used in education , government , religion , and other formal domains , while Creole ( or 'dialect ' as it is referred to locally ) is used in informal situations such as in the home and among friends .
===Religion===
According to the 2001 census , 81.5 % of the population of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines identified themselves as Christianity , 6.7 % has another religion and 8.8 % has no religion or did not state a religion ( 1.5 % ) .
Anglicanism constitutes the largest religious category , with 17.8 % of the population . Pentecostals are the second largest group ( 17.6 % ) . The next largest group are Methodists # Caribbean ( 10.9 % of the population ) , followed by Seventh-day Adventists ( 10.2 % ) and Baptists ( 10.0 % ) . Other Christians include Jehovah 's Witnesses ( 0.6 % ) , Roman Catholics ( 7.5 % ) , Evangelicalism ( 2.8 % ) , Church of God ( 2.5 % ) , Brethren Christian ( 1.3 % ) , and the Salvation Army ( 0.3 % ) .
Between 1991 and 2001 the number of Anglicans , Brethren , Methodists and Roman Catholics decreased , while the number of Pentecostals , Evangelicals and Seventh-day Adventists increased .
The number of non-Christians is small . These religious groups include the Rastafari movement ( 1.5 % of the population ) , Hinduism in the West Indies and Muslims ( 1.5 % ) .
== Culture ==
===Sport===
Cricket , Rugby football and association football are most popular among men whereas netball is most popular among women . Basketball , volleyball and tennis are also very popular .
The country 's prime association football league is the NLA Premier League , which provides its Saint Vincent and the Grenadines national football team national ( association ) football team with most players . A notable Vincentian footballer is Ezra Hendrickson , former national team captain who played at several Major League Soccer clubs in the United States and is now an assistant coach with the Seattle Sounders FC .
The country regularly participates at the Caribbean Basketball Championship where a Saint Vincent and the Grenadines national basketball team men 's team and a Saint Vincent and the Grenadines women 's national basketball team women 's team compete . Saint Vincent and the Grenadines also has its own Saint Vincent and the Grenadines national rugby union team which is ranked 84th in the world . Other notable sports played at the regional level include track and field .
===Music===
Music popular in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines includes big drum , Calypso music , Soca music , steelpan and reggae . String band music , quadrille and traditional storytelling are also popular . One of the most successful St Vincent natives is Kevin Lyttle . He was named Cultural Ambassador for the Island 19 September 2013.
The national anthem of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is `` Saint Vincent , Land so beautiful '' , adopted upon independence in 1979.
=== Media ===
Saint Vincent has twelve FM radio stations : 88.9 Adoration Fm , 89.1 Jem Radio , 89.7 NBC Radio , 95.7 and 105.7 Praise FM ( Saint Vincent and the Grenadines ) , 96.7 Nice Radio , 97.1 Hot 97 , 98.3 Star FM , 99.9 We FM , 103.7 Hitz , 102.7 EZee radio , 104.3 Xtreme FM and 106.9 Boom FM . There are several Internet radio stations including Chronicles Christian Radio . It has one television broadcast station ZBG-TV ( SVGTV ) and one cable television provider .
St Vincent and the Grenadines Broadcasting Co-operation is the parent company for SVGTV , Magic 103.7.
==See also==
* Outline of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
* Index of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines-related articles
==References==
==Further reading==
* Bobrow , Jill & Jinkins , Dana . 1985 . St. Vincent and the Grenadines . 4th Edition Revised and Updated , Concepts Publishing Co. , Waitsfield , Vermont , 1993.
* Cosover , Mary Jo . 1989 . `` St. Vincent and the Grenadines . '' In Islands of the Commonwealth Caribbean : A Regional Study , edited by Sandra W. Meditz and Dennis M. Hanratty . US Government Printing Office , Washington , D.C.
* CIA Factbook entry
* Gonsalves , Ralph E. 1994 . History and the Future : A Caribbean Perspective . Quik-Print , Kingstown , St Vincent .
* US Dept of State Profile
* Williams , Eric . 1964 . British Historians and the West Indies , Port-of-Spain .
==External links==
; Government
*
* Website of the Prime Minister of St Vincent and the Grenadines
* Chief of State and Cabinet Members
; General information
* Saint Vincent and the Grenadines . The World Factbook . Central Intelligence Agency .
* Saint Vincent and the Grenadines from UCB Libraries GovPubs
*
* St Vincent and the Grenadines from the BBC News
*
* Key Development Forecasts for St Vincent and the Grenadines from International Futures
* Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Private Sector Assessment Report
Category : Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Category : Countries in the Caribbean
Category : Island countries
Category : Windward Islands
Category : English-speaking countries and territories
Category : Member states of the Caribbean Community
Category : Member states of the Commonwealth of Nations
Category : Member states of the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States
Category : Member states of the United Nations
Category : States and territories established in 1979
Category : Small Island Developing States
Category:1979 establishments in North America
Category : Countries in North America <article_end> <article_start>  
Dominica ( or ; Kalinago language : Wai  tu kubuli ; Dominique ; Dominican Creole French : Dominik ) , officially the Commonwealth of Dominica , is an island country in the Caribbean . The capital , Roseau , is located on the western side of the island . It is geographically situated as part of the Windward Islands chain in the Lesser Antilles archipelago in the Caribbean Sea . The island is located near Guadeloupe to the northwest and Martinique to the south-southeast . Its area is , and the highest point is Morne Diablotins , at in elevation . The population was 71,293 at the 2011 census .
The island was settled by the Arawak arriving from South America in the 5th century . The Kalinago displaced the Arawak by the 15th century . Christopher Columbus is said to have passed the island on Sunday , 3 November , 1493 . It was later colonised by Europeans , predominantly by the French from the 1690s to 1763 . The French imported enslaved people from West Africa to Dominica to work on coffee plantations . Kingdom of Great Britain took possession in 1763 after the Seven Years ' War , and it gradually established English as its official language . The island gained independence as a republic in 1978.
Dominica has been nicknamed the `` Nature Isle of the Caribbean '' for its natural environment . It is the youngest island in the Lesser Antilles , and in fact it is still being formed by Geothermal ( geology ) -volcano activity , as evidenced by the world 's second-largest [ spring ] , called Boiling Lake . The island has lush mountainous rainforests , and it is the home of many rare plants , animals , and bird species . There are xeric areas in some of the western coastal regions , but heavy rainfall occurs inland . The imperial amazon , also known as the imperial amazon and found only on Dominica , is the island 's national bird and featured on the Flag of Dominica , which is one of only two national flags containing the colour purple ( the other being Nicaragua ) . The country is a member of the Commonwealth of Nations , the United Nations , the Organization of American States and the Non-Aligned Movement .
==Etymology==
Dominica 's name is locally pronounced with emphasis on the third syllable , related to its French name of Dominique ( given name ) and the Spanish pronunciation of its name .
== History ==
=== Geologic history ===
Dominica first emerged from the sea during the Oligocene era approximately 26 million years ago , making it one of the last Caribbean islands to be formed by Volcanism .
=== Pre-colonial period and early European contact ===
Dominica 's precolonial indigenous inhabitants were the Island Carib people , who are thought to have driven out the previous Arawak population . The Caribs called the island Wai  tu kubuli , which means `` Tall is her body . ''
Christopher Columbus , sailing for Spain , named the island as Dominica , after the Latin language term dies Dominica for Sunday , the day on which the Spanish first saw it in November 1493 . Some Spanish colonisers settled here . But , as European explorers and settlers entered the region , indigenous refugees from surrounding islands settled Dominica and pushed out the Spanish settlers . The Spanish instead settled other areas that were easier to control and had more natural resources .
=== French colony ===
Spain had little success in colonising Dominica . In 1632 , the French Compagnie des les de l'Amrique claimed it and other `` Petites Antilles '' for Kingdom of France , but no physical occupation took place . Between 1642 and 1650 , French missionary Raymond Breton became the first regular European visitor to the island .
In 1660 , the French and English agreed that Dominica and Saint Vincent ( island ) St. Vincent should not be settled , but instead left to the Carib as neutral territory . But its natural resources attracted expeditions of English and French foresters , who began harvesting timber . In 1690 , the French established their first permanent settlements . French woodcutters from Martinique and Guadeloupe began to set up timber camps to supply the French islands with wood , and they gradually became permanent settlers . They brought the first enslaved Africans from West Africa to Dominique , as they called it in French .
In 1715 , a revolt of `` poor white '' smallholders in the north of Martinique , known as La Gaoul , caused settlers to migrate to southern Dominique , where they set up smallholdings . Meanwhile , French families and others from Guadeloupe settled in the north . In 1727 , the first French commander , M. Le Grand , took charge of the island with a basic French government . Dominique formally became a colony of France , and the island was divided into districts or `` quarters '' . The French had already developed plantation agriculture on Martinique and Guadeloupe , where they cultivated sugarcane with enslaved African workers . In Dominique they gradually developed coffee plantations . They imported so many African slaves to fill the labour demands that the population became predominantly African in ethnicity .
In 1761 , during the Seven Years ' War in Europe , a British expedition against Dominica led by Andrew Rollo , 5th Lord Rollo conquered the island , along with several other Caribbean islands . In 1763 , France had lost the war and ceded the island to Great Britain under the Treaty of Paris ( 1763 ) . The same year , the British established a legislative assembly , with only European colonists represented . French remained the official language , but Antillean Creole , which had developed from it , was spoken by most of the population .
In 1778 the French , with the active co-operation of the population , began the Invasion of Dominica ( 1778 ) re-capture of Dominica . This was ended by the Treaty of Paris ( 1783 ) , which returned the island to British control . But the island population , especially the class of gens de couleur , resisted British restrictions . The British retained control through French invasions in 1795 and 1805 , the first taking place during the period of the Haitian Revolution , which gained the independence of Haiti ( formerly Saint-Domingue , France 's richest Caribbean colony ) .
=== British colony ===
Great Britain established a small colony in 1805 . It used Dominica as part of the triangular trade , by which slaves were imported and sold as labour in the islands as part of a trade that included producing and shipping sugar and coffee as commodity crops to Europe . The best documented slave plantation on the island is Hillsborough Estate , which had 71 male and 68 female slaves . The Quarry Bank Mill family were notable : Thomas Hodgson , a brother-in-law , owned a slave ship , and Thomas Greg and his son John Greg were part-owners of sugar plantations on Dominica . In January 1814 , 20 slaves absconded from Hillsborough . They were recorded as recaptured and punished with 100 lashes applied to the males and 50 for the females . The slaves reportedly said that one of their people had died in the plantation hospital , and they believed he had been poisoned .
In 1831 , reflecting a liberalisation of official British racial attitudes , the Brown Privilege Bill conferred political and social rights on free blacks ( mostly free people of colour , who generally were of mixed race , with African and European ancestry ) . With the Slavery Abolition Act 1833 , Britain ended the institution of slavery throughout British Empire , except in India .
With freedom came enfranchisement . In 1835 , the first three men of African descent were elected to the legislative assembly of Dominica . Many slaves from the neighbouring French colonial islands of Guadeloupe and Martinique fled to Dominica . In 1838 , Dominica became the first colony of the British West Indies to have an elected legislature controlled by an ethnic African majority . Most of these legislators had been free people of colour and smallholders or merchants before the abolition of slavery . Their economic and social views were different from the interests of the small , wealthy English plantation class . Reacting to a perceived threat to their power , the planters lobbied for more direct British rule .
In 1865 , after much agitation and tension , the colonial office replaced the elective assembly with one made up of one-half members who were elected and one-half who were appointed . Planters , who were allied with colonial administrators , outmanoeuvred the elected legislators on many occasions . In 1871 , Dominica became part of the British Leeward Islands . The political power of the ethnic African population progressively eroded . Crown colony government was re-established in 1896 . All political rights were curtailed for people of colour and blacks , who were the overwhelming majority of the population . Development aid , offered as compensation for disfranchisement , resulted in negligible improvements in conditions for most ethnic Africans .
=== Early 20th century ===
In World War I , many Dominicans , mainly the sons of small farmers , volunteered to fight in Europe for the British Empire . After the war , an upsurge of political consciousness throughout the Caribbean led to the formation of the List of historical autonomist and secessionist movements # British West Indies . Marshaling public frustration with the lack of a voice in governing Dominica , this group won one-third of the popularly elected seats of the legislative assembly in 1924 , and one-half in 1936 . In 1940 , administration of Dominica was transferred from the British Leeward Islands to the British Windward Islands . During World War II , some Dominicans volunteered in British and Caribbean forces . Thousands of Free French refugees from Martinique and Guadeloupe escaped to Dominica from the Vichy France-controlled French islands , staying in Roseau and other villages .
Until 1958 , Dominica was governed as part of the British Windward Islands . Caribbean islands sought independence from 1958 to 1962 , and Dominica became a province of the short-lived West Indies Federation in 1958 . After the federation dissolved in 1962 , Dominica became an associated state of the United Kingdom in 1967 , and formally took responsibility for its internal affairs . On 3 November 1978 , the Commonwealth of Dominica was granted independence as a republic , led by Prime Minister Patrick John .
===Post-independence===
In mid-1979 , political discontent with Founding Prime Minister Patrick John 's administration climaxed in a civilian coup and ended in the passage of a Motion of No Confidence in the House of Assembly , Dominica 's legislature , against John , collapsing the John administration . A new , so-called `` Interim Government '' was formed under Dominica 's second Prime Minister Oliver Seraphin ; Seraphin 's main task was to prepare the country for fresh general elections constitutionally due in 1980 , hence the unofficial title `` Interim '' Prime Minister . Seraphin organized and led a splinter of the Dominica Labour Party called the Democratic Labour Party into the 1980 general election and lost mainly because his nearly thirteen month-long premiership was dominated by the fallout from Category Five Hurricane David , which caused 56 deaths and untold damage across the island . Hurricane Allen the following year caused further damage . After the 1980 Dominican general election , Seraphin 's government was replaced by one led by the Dominica Freedom Party ( DFP ) under Prime Minister Eugenia Charles ; she was the Caribbean 's first female Prime Minister .
In 1981 , Charles 's government was threatened with two attempted coups . The first was led by Frederick Newton , commander of the Military of Dominica , who organised an attack on the police headquarters in Roseau which resulted in the death of a police officer . Newton and five other soldiers were found guilty in the attack and sentenced to death in 1983 ; the sentences of the five accomplices were later commuted to life in prison , but Newton was executed in 1986 . A second occurred later in the year when the country was threatened with a takeover by mercenaries in Operation Red Dog , led by Mike Perdue and Wolfgang Droege . They tried to overthrow Charles as Prime Minister and reinstall ex-Prime Minister John in exchange for control over the country 's development . The Federal Bureau of Investigation was tipped off , and the ship hired to transport the mercenaries never left dock . The mercenaries lacked formal military experience or training , and most of the crew had been misled into joining by the ringleader Mike Perdue . White supremacy Don Black ( white nationalist ) was also jailed for his part in the attempted coup , which violated US Neutrality Act of 1794 laws .
The Charles government supported the 1983 American Invasion of Grenada , earning Dominica praise from the Reagan administration and an increase in financial aid .
By the middle of the 1980s , the economy had begun to recover , before weakening again due to a decrease in banana prices . Eugenia Charles won the 1985 Dominican general election general election , becoming only the first incumbent Dominica Prime Minister to be popularly re-elected . The continuing downturn in the economy and the tight grip by Eugenia Charles on Dominica politics gave rise to a self-titled `` Third Force '' political formation in 1988 , which disrupted the traditional two-party arrangement of governing DFP and opposition DLP . `` Third Force '' soon formalized as United Workers Party and selected as its leader Edison James , the former General Manager of the Dominica Banana Marketing Company . This was a strategic selection given James 's prestige among banana farmers and his originating from the East or Atlantic Coast that had begun to feel alienated by the West or Caribbean Sea Coast elites in Roseau , Dominica 's capital . Eugenia Charles again won the 1990 Dominican general election general election , the first incumbent Dominica Prime Minister to win three consecutive general elections . However , Eugenia Charles 's DFP had been pushed to within one seat of losing its majority in Parliament by the emergence of the UWP . It was , therefore , no great surprise when Eugenia Charles gave up political leadership of the Dominica Freedom Party in 1993 and did not contest the 1995 general election in any capacity . No longer benefiting from the veteran charismatic leadership of Prime Minister Eugenia Charles , the Dominica Freedom Party lost the 1995 Dominican general election to the United Workers ' Party ( Dominica ) United Workers ' Party ( UWP ) , whose leader Edison James became Prime Minister . James , former General Manager of the Dominica Banana Marketing Company attempted to diversify the Dominican economy away from over-reliance on bananas . The crop was largely destroyed by Hurricane Luis in 1995 . Further James was unable to restore banana to its former selling price and prestige . Moreover , the James administration became embroiled in Opposition charges of official corruption .
In the 2000 Dominican general election 31 January , 2000 general election , the UWP were defeated by a coalition of the DLP , led by left-leaning Rosie Douglas Roosevelt B . `` Rosie '' Douglas and the Dominica Freedom Party led by former trade union leader , Charles Savarin . Douglas became Prime Minister . One UWP member of the House of Assembly crossed the floor , joining the DLP-DFP coalition government . However , Douglas died on 1 October , 2000 after only a few months . Prime Minister Douglas was replaced by Pierre Charles ( Dominican politician ) , who also died in office on 6 January , 2004 . Roosevelt Skerrit , also of the DLP , replaced Pierre Charles as Prime Minister , becoming the world 's youngest head of government at thirty-one . Under Skerrit 's leadership , the DLP won 2005 Dominican general election that gave the party 12 seats in the 21-seat Parliament , to the UWP 's 8 seats . An independent candidate affiliated with the DLP won a seat as well . Later , the independent candidate joined the government . With his 2005 election win , Skerrit became only the second incumbent Prime Minister of seven to be popularly re-elected .
In the 2009 Dominican general election , the DLP won 18 of 21 seats . The UWP claimed campaign improprieties and embarked on a wide range of protest actions , including boycott of Parliament . UWP 's boycott lasted at least three unauthorized absences from Parliament for two of their three Elected Representatives in Parliament in violation of Parliamentary procedure , leading to their two seats being declared vacant and by-elections being called to fill them ; by-elections were conducted for those two vacant seats in July 2010 , and the UWP again won both seats . The DLP under Skerrit went on to win the 2014 Dominican general election .
On 17 September , 2012 Eliud Williams was sworn in as President ( a largely ceremonial role ) , replacing Nicholas Liverpool Dr. Nicholas Liverpool who was reportedly removed from office due to ill health . On 30 September , 2013 former Trade Union leader and former Dominica Freedom Party leader Charles Savarin was elected president having only days before resigned as a Minister of Government .
Tropical Storm Erika devastated the island in August 2015 , killing 30 and causing severe environmental and economic damage Dominica was again struck on 18 September , 2017 , suffering a direct landfall from Category 5 Hurricane Maria . Early estimates of damage suggested 90 % of the buildings on the island had been destroyed , with infrastructure left in ruins . The UK , France and the Netherlands set up shipping and air lifts to take aid to the island ; the scale of destruction having left most people homeless .
In December 2019 , incumbent Prime Minister Roosevelt Skerrit won his fourth consecutive general election eighteen seats to three , becoming the first Dominica Prime Minister ever to do so .
== Geography and climate ==
Dominica is an island nation in the Caribbean Sea , the northernmost of the Windward Islands ( though it is sometimes considered the southernmost of the Leeward Islands ) . The size of the country is about and it is about 29 miles ( 47 ; km ) long and 16 miles ( 26 ; km ) wide .
Known as `` The Nature Island of the Caribbean '' due to its lush scenery and varied flora and fauna , Dominica is largely covered by rainforest and is home to the world 's second-largest [ spring ] , Boiling Lake . Within its borders lie two ecoregions : Windward Islands moist forests and Windward Islands xeric scrub . The most mountainous of the Lesser Antilles , its volcanic peaks are cones of lava craters , the largest of these being ( north-to-south ) Morne aux Diables , Morne Diablotins ( the highest on the island at 1,447 m ) , Morne Trois Pitons and Morne Anglais . Morne Trois Pitons National Park is a tropical forest blended with volcanic features ; it was recognised as a World Heritage Site on 4 April , 1995 , a distinction it shares with four other Caribbean islands . The Calibishie area in the country 's northeast has sandy beaches . Some plants and animals thought to be extinct on surrounding islands can still be found in Dominica 's forests . The island has several protected areas , including List of national parks of Dominica , as well as 365 rivers . For a few years the government sought to encourage the island as an ecotourism destination , although the hurricane of 2017 has since changed these plans . The country had a 2018 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 1.06/10 , ranking it 166th globally out of 172 countries .
There are two primary population centres : the capital Roseau ( with 14,725 inhabitants in 2011 ) and Portsmouth , Dominica ( with 4,167 inhabitants in 2011 ) . The main centres tend to be located around the coast , with the mountainous interior sparsely populated .
Dominica is especially vulnerable to [ as the island is located in what is referred to as the hurricane region . In 1979 , Hurricane David ] struck the island as a Category ; 4 hurricane , causing widespread and extreme damage . On 17 August , 2007 , [ [ Hurricane Dean , a Category ; 1 hurricane at the time , hit the island . A mother and her seven-year-old son died when a landslide caused by the heavy rains crushed their house . In another incident two people were injured when a tree fell on their house . Prime Minister of Dominica Roosevelt Skerrit estimated that 100 to 125 homes were damaged , and that the agricultural sector was extensively damaged , in particular the banana crop . In August 2015 , Tropical Storm Erika caused extensive flooding and landslides across the island . Multiple communities were evacuated and upwards of 30 people were killed . According to a Rapid Damage and Impact Assessment prepared for Dominica by the World Bank , the total damage and losses from the storm were US $ 484.82 million or 90 % of Dominica 's yearly GDP . Category 5 Hurricane Maria struck the island in 2017 and caused losses of approximately US $ 930 million or 226 % of GDP .
===Fauna===
The Imperial amazon ( Amazona imperialis ) is Dominica 's national bird and is endemism to its mountain forests . A related species , the Jaco or red-necked parrot ( A. arausiaca ) , is also a Dominican endemic . Both birds are rare and protected , though some forest is still threatened by logging in addition to the long-standing threat of hurricanes .
Dominica is home to 195 species of birds , because of the isolated location of Dominica this is a lesser number compared to Trinidad which is located closer to mainland South-America with 472 bird species .
The Caribbean Sea offshore of the island of Dominica is home to many cetaceans . Most notably a group of sperm whales live in this area year-round . Other cetaceans commonly seen in the area include spinner dolphins , pantropical spotted dolphins and bottlenose dolphins . Less commonly seen animals include killer whales , false killer whales , pygmy sperm whales , dwarf sperm whales , Risso 's dolphins , common dolphins , Atlantic spotted dolphins , [ whales ] and Bryde 's whales . This makes Dominica a destination for tourists interested in whale-watching .
===Territorial disputes===
The Commonwealth of Dominica is engaged in a long-running dispute with Venezuela over Venezuela 's territorial claims to the sea surrounding Isla Aves ( literally Bird Island , but in fact called 'Bird Rock ' by Dominican authorities ) , a tiny islet located west of the island of Dominica .
== Government==
Dominica is a parliamentary democracy within the Commonwealth of Nations . The capital is Roseau . The Commonwealth of Dominica is one of the Caribbean 's few republics . The president is the [ of state ] , while executive power rests with the Cabinet ( government ) , headed by the prime minister . The unicameral parliament consists of the 30-member House of Assembly of Dominica , which consists of 21 directly elected members and nine senators , who may either be appointed by the president or elected by the other members of the House of Assembly .
Unlike other former British colonies in the region , Dominica was never a Commonwealth realm , instead becoming a republic on independence . Dominica is a full and participating member of the Caribbean Community Caribbean Community ( CARICOM ) and the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States ( OECS ) .
Dominica is also a member of the International Criminal Court , with a Bilateral Immunity Agreement of protection with the US military , as covered under Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court . In January 2008 , Dominica joined the Bolivarian Alternative for the Americas .
=== Human rights ===
Both male and female LGBT rights in Dominica same-sex sexual activity is illegal in Dominica .
==Administrative divisions==
Dominica is divided into 10 parishes of Dominica , given below with their 2011 Census populations :
* Saint Andrew Parish , Dominica ( 9,471 )
* Saint David Parish , Dominica ( 6,043 )
* Saint George Parish , Dominica ( 21,241 )
* Saint John Parish , Dominica ( 6,561 )
* Saint Joseph Parish , Dominica ( 5,637 )
* Saint Luke Parish , Dominica ( 1,668 )
* Saint Mark Parish , Dominica ( 1,834 )
* Saint Patrick Parish , Dominica ( 7,622 )
* Saint Paul Parish , Dominica ( 9,786 )
* Saint Peter Parish , Dominica ( 1,430 )
== Economy ==
Dominica 's currency is the East Caribbean Dollar . In 2008 , Dominica had one of the lowest per capita gross domestic product ( GDP ) rates of Eastern Caribbean states . The country nearly had a financial crisis in 2003 and 2004 , but Dominica 's economy grew by 3.5 % in 2005 and 4.0 % in 2006 , following a decade of poor performance . Growth in 2006 was attributed to gains in tourism , construction , offshore and other services , and some sub-sectors of the banana industry . Around this time the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) praised the Government of Dominica for its successful macroeconomic reforms , but also pointed out remaining challenges , including the need for further reductions in public debt , increased financial sector regulation , and market diversification .
Agriculture and especially bananas once dominated Dominica 's economy , and nearly one-third of the labour force worked in agriculture in the early 2000s . This sector , however , is highly vulnerable to weather conditions and to external events affecting commodity prices . In 2007 , Hurricane Dean caused significant damage to the agricultural sector as well as the country 's infrastructure , especially roads . In response to reduced European Union ( EU ) trade preferences for bananas from the former European colonies after the 2009 WTO decision , the government has diversified the agricultural sector by promoting the production of coffee , patchouli , aloe vera , cut flowers , and exotic fruits such as mango , guava and papaya , while the economy has become increasingly dependent on tourism .
The expected increase of Dominica 's Immigrant investor programs ( CBI ) fees has been suspended with no implementation date in sight , as announced by Prime Minister Roosevelt Skerrit , in the 2016 budget speech .
=== International trade ===
Dominica is a beneficiary of the Caribbean Basin Initiative ( CBI ) that grants duty-free entry into the United States for many goods . Dominica also belongs to the predominantly English-speaking Caribbean Community ( CARICOM ) , the CARICOM Single Market and Economy ( CSME ) , and the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States ( OECS ) .
=== Financial services industry ===
The Commonwealth of Dominica is becoming in recent years a major international financial centre . The largest sectors are `` offshore banking , payment processing companies , and general corporate activities '' . Regulation and supervision of the financial services industry is the responsibility of the Financial Service Unit of the Commonwealth of Dominica ( FSU ) under the supervision of the Ministry of Finance . There are a number of service providers . These include global financial institutions including Scotiabank , Royal Bank of Canada , Cathedral Investment Bank , First Caribbean International Bank , and The Interoceanic Bank of the Caribbean .
Starting in the mid-late 1990s , offshore financial centres , such as the Commonwealth of Dominica , came under increasing pressure from the OECD for their allegedly harmful tax regimes , where the OECD wished to prevent low-tax regimes from having an advantage in the global marketplace . The OECD threatened to place the Commonwealth of Dominica and other financial centres on a `` black list '' and impose sanctions against them . However , the Commonwealth of Dominica successfully avoided being placed on the OECD black list by committing to regulatory reform to improve transparency and begin information exchange with OECD member countries about their citizens .
Dominica supposedly offers tax-free status to companies relocating from abroad . It is not known how many companies benefit from the tax-free status because of the strict confidentiality the government enforces , although it is known many Internet businesses and [ fund ] s utilise Dominica for this reason . However , on 12 July , 2012 Dominica signed an agreement with Poland to exchange tax information .
=== Economic immigrants ===
The Commonwealth of Dominica offers an official and legally mandated economic citizenship to those seeking a valid second citizenship . The nationality law of Dominica authorises the government to waive the normal requirement of seven years of legal residence to acquire citizenship in exchange for an investment into their country 's economy . The required contribution for a main applicant starts at US $ 100,000 through the Economic Diversification Fund . Alternatively , since 2014 , applicants can make a US $ 200,000 minimum investment in pre-approved real estate from island exclusive resorts or global brands like Marriott , Kempinski or Hilton . According to officials , the citizenship by investment ( CBI ) programme was an economic and fiscal `` lifeline '' in the aftermath of Tropical Storm Erika in 2015 and Hurricane Maria in 2017 , and its new investment option had become the main source of Foreign Direct Investment into Dominica by early 2016 . Dominican citizens can travel without a visa , or obtain a visa upon entry , to nearly 140 countries and territories , including the United Kingdom and the Schengen Zone . Applying for Dominica citizenship requires interacting with official Government Approved Economic Citizenship Agents as the first step in the application process . This program is currently valued at 16 % of the government 's total revenue .
The government 's management of the economic citizenship programme and an initial perceived lack of transparency in the use of the revenues generated are a frequent topic of heated domestic political controversy . Referring to the opposition , Prime Minister Skerrit in 2016 stated that `` If they can discredit the Citizenship by Investment Program and make Dominica an unattractive place to obtain citizenship , then revenues would fall and the government would not be able to rebuild the country . Or , the government would then have to increase taxes on the people ; making itself unpopular in their sight . '' Since then , the Government of Dominica has improved transparency of CBI funds . According to Prime Minister Skerrit 's 2018-2019 Budget Address , the island 's CBI Programme has helped develop a National Health Insurance pilot that provides Dominican children in critical medical conditions with overseas treatment . Because many residents were displaced by Hurricane Maria 's impact on the small Caribbean island , the government pledged to build 5,000 hurricane-proof homes , of which the first batch of 125 houses were scheduled for occupancy in February 2019 . The CBI Programme has also significantly helped to develop and create jobs in the island 's ecotourism sector . Furthermore , the Skerrit administration set aside EC $ 5m every month for the construction of a new airport .
The Financial Times ' Professional Wealth Management publication ranked Dominica as the world 's best citizenship by investment programme in its annual CBI Index . According to the report , investors choose Dominica 's citizenship because it has the most affordable investment threshold , the application process is straightforward and streamlined , while the security checks each applicant is subjected to remain very strict .
=== Tourism ===
Dominica is mostly volcanic and has few beaches ; therefore , Tourism in Dominica has developed more slowly than on neighbouring islands . Nevertheless , Dominica 's mountains , rainforests , freshwater lakes , hot springs , waterfalls , and diving spots make it an attractive ecotourism destination . Cruise ship stopovers have increased following the development of modern docking and waterfront facilities in Roseau , the capital . Out of 22 Caribbean islands tracked , Dominica had the fewest visitors in 2008 ( 55,800 or 0.3 % of the total ) . This was about half as many as visited Haiti . The volcanic nature of the island has attracted scuba diving .
== Infrastructure ==
=== Air ===
There are two regional airports on the island , but no international airports . Therefore , flying to Dominica requires travelling through San Juan , Puerto Rico or other nearby islands in the Caribbean such as Martinique , Guadeloupe , or Barbados . The primary airport , Douglas-Charles Airport ( DOM ) , is on the northeast coast and is about a 45-minute drive from Portsmouth ( 1 hour from Roseau ) . The second is Canefield Airport ( DCF ) , about 15 minutes from Roseau on the southwest coast . Douglas-Charles Airport is suitable for limited use of commercial jets because of runway length . Douglas-Charles currently has regular service by Air Sunshine , Winair and Seaborne Airlines using twin turboprop aircraft like the ATR ( aircraft manufacturer ) and Saab 340 , as well as Conviasa and Amerijet , which , using Boeing 727 , is the only airline with jet service to the republic . A runway extension and service upgrade project began at Douglas-Charles Airport around 2006 and was finished in 2010 . In March 2013 , airline American Eagle halted flights to the island citing high labour costs .
=== Roads ===
Dominica 's road network runs primarily along the coastline and along river valleys . Major roads are two-lane highways which connect the capital , Roseau , with Portsmouth ( Edward Oliver LeBlanc ) and the Douglas Charles Airport ( Dr. Nicholas Liverpool Highway ) . It takes about 45 minutes to drive from Portsmouth to Roseau . Private minibuses form the major public transport system . These major roads were reconstructed from the early 2010s to 2015 with assistance from the People 's Republic of China and the European Union .
Due to Tropical Storm Erika # Effects in Dominica several road surfaces and bridges were damaged by flooding and landslides , including on the just completed E.O . LeBlanc Highway ( Roseau to Portsmouth ) and Nicholas Liverpool Dr. Nicholas Liverpool Highway ( Pont Cass to Douglas Charles Airport ) . To alleviate this , the government announced that it intended to install emergency bridges in Roseau Valley near the Trafalgar Falls to Wotten Waven and in Emshall . Hurricane Maria # Dominica also damaged the road network .
=== Green energy ===
Dominica 's electricity sector includes power from hydroelectricity , solar energy , and geothermal energy . Following on from the devastation caused by Hurricane Maria in September 2017 , the Dominican government claimed it would invest in geothermal energy . In early March 2018 Dominica signed an International Solar Alliance Framework Agreement , in an attempt to exploit solar energy to power the country with a source of renewable energy .
== Demographics ==
The vast majority of Dominicans are of African descent . There is a growing mixed population along with a small European origin minority ( descendants of French and British colonists along with some people of Irish descent from indentured servants ) and there are small numbers of Lebanese , Syrians and Asians . Dominica is also the only Eastern Caribbean island that still has a population of pre-Columbian native Kalinago ( previously called Caribs ) , who were exterminated or driven from neighbouring islands . there are more than 3,000 Kalinago remaining . They live in eight villages on the east coast of Dominica . This special Carib Territory ( now Kalinago Territory ) was granted by the British Crown in 1903.
The population growth rate of Dominica is very low , due primarily to emigration to other countries . In the early 21st century , emigrant numbers for the most popular countries are as follows : the United States ( 8,560 ) , the United Kingdom ( 6,739 ) , Canada ( 605 ) , and France ( 394 ) .
Dominica had a relatively large number of centenarians . In March 2007 there were 22 centenarians out of the island 's 70,000 inhabitants three times the average incidence of centenarianism in developed countries . The reasons for this were once the subject of a study that formerly had been undertaken at Ross University School of Medicine .
Dominica was partially integrated into the federal colony of the Leeward Islands in 1832 . Later , in 1871 , it became a full part of the Federation of the Leeward Islands . From the start it was a peculiar relationship for previously Dominica had played no part in the political or cultural traditions of the other more Anglophone islands of the federation . Now , as a Leeward Island , this much larger territory , with thousands of acres of forested unclaimed land , was open to the people of Montserrat and Antigua . At the beginning of the 20th century , the Rose 's Company , which produced Rose 's lime juice , saw demand for its product outgrow its ability to supply the product from Montserrat . Their response to the situation was to buy land on Dominica and encourage Montserrat farm labourers to relocate . As a result , there came to be two linguistic communities in Dominica , Wesley , Dominica and Marigot , Dominica .
In 1902 , on 8 May , the Mount Pele volcano on Martinique erupted destroying the city of Saint-Pierre , Martinique Saint-Pierre . Refugees from Martinique arrived in boats to the southern villages of Dominica and some remained permanently on the island .
=== Languages ===
English language is the official language of Dominica and is universally spoken and understood . In addition , Dominican Creole , an Antillean Creole based on French language , is widely spoken . This is due to French migration to the island starting in 1690 , a majority French Creole speaking population that resided on the island , and its location between the two French-speaking departments of Martinique and Guadeloupe . Since 1979 , Dominica has been a member of La Francophonie . Dominican Creole is particularly used among the older generation , which also speaks a patois language . Because of a decline in the use of Creole by the younger generation , initiatives have been set up in an effort to increase usage and promote this unique part of the nation 's history and culture .
Along with Creole , a dialect known as Kokoy ( or Cockoy ) is spoken . It is a type of List of English-based pidgins which is a mix of Leeward Island English Creole and Dominican Creole , and is mainly spoken in the north-eastern villages of Marigot and Wesley , by the descendants of immigrants from Montserrat and Antigua . Over time there has been much intermarrying , but there are still traces of difference in origin . As a result of this mixture of languages and heritage , Dominica is a member of both the French-speaking Francophonie and the English-speaking Commonwealth of Nations .
Island Carib language , also known as Igneri ( Ieri , Igeri , Inyeri ) , was an Arawakan language historically spoken by the Island Caribs of the Lesser Antilles in the Caribbean . The Island Caribs lived throughout the southern Lesser Antilles such as Dominica , Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and Trinidad and Tobago , supposedly having conquered them from their previous inhabitants , the Igneri . Island Carib became extinct about 1920 , but an offshoot survives as Garifuna language , primarily in Central America .
=== Religion ===
61.4 % of the population is Roman Catholic , though in recent years a number of Protestant churches have been established . About 1012 % of the population belongs to one of the Seventh-day Adventist theology Seventh-Day ( Saturday ) denominations , which includes Yahweh Congregation , Church of God ( Seventh-Day ) , and the Seventh-day Adventist Church .
According to the Association of Religion Data Archives , in 2010 the World Christian Database reported that the largest non-Christian religious groups included : spiritualism followed by 2.6 % of the population ; Bah Faith followed by 1.7 % ; Agnosticism followed by 0.5 % ; Buddhism , Hinduism , and Islam , each followed by 0.1 % ; and Chinese folk religion , Neoreligions , and Atheism each followed by non-negligible proportions ( i.e. , < 0.1 % ) of the population . The nation 's first mosque was built near Ross University .
=== Education ===
School in Dominica is mandatory up to secondary school . After pre-school , pupils attend primary school for six or seven years , and are admitted into secondary school on the basis of a Common Entrance Exam . After five years the students take the General Certificate of Education ( GCE ) , widely replaced by the current Caribbean Secondary Education Certificate administered by the Caribbean Examination Council ( a 15-member confederation of the Caribbean community ( CARICOM ) . The more advanced version of this examination , CAPE , can be taken upon completion of two years of community college . The island has its own Dominica State College , formerly named Clifton Dupigny Community College . Some Dominicans attend universities in Cuba on scholarships offered by its government ; others go to the University of the West Indies or to universities in the United Kingdom , the United States , or other countries .
Archbold Tropical Research and Education Center , a biological field station owned by Clemson University , is located at Springfield Estate between Canefield and Pont Cass . In 2006 All Saints University School of Medicine opened in temporary facilities in Loubire , it was later located in Roseau , Dominica . A marine biology institute in Mahaut , Dominica , the Institute for Tropical Marine Ecology , closed in 2009.
Ross University School of Medicine was located at Portsmouth , Dominica . Ross had been operating in Dominica since the 1980s . There used to be a thousand medical students arriving annually from the United States and Canada who studied at Ross University , but the campus was permanently relocated to Barbados at the beginning of the 2019 Spring semester due to extensive hurricane damage suffered at the Dominican campus .
The Dominica Library and Information Service serves an integral role in the education of the citizens of the country . The creation of a public library in Dominica did not come easily though the impetus was a noble one that would help `` the coloured people ... [ improve ] their lot as they moved along the path to complete freedom ...  ( Borom , 203 ) . The Dominican library began as a reading room that would evolve into a free and public library that was n't fully free : patrons were required to pay a subscription fee . Surviving religious and political discord , the great depression , and two world wars , the library finally came under the care of the government where funds were set aside for its upkeep . Ironically , the early stages of the library 's history were dedicated to remove the `` uncouth '' , and `` barbarous patois '' , which today is being preserved . However , it did achieve its goal of `` diminishing the island  s very high percentage of illiteracy '' ( pg . 225 ) . However , the historical library was demolished in the wake on hurricane Maria in 2018 , and slated to be rebuilt with a more modern outlook .
== Culture ==
Dominica is home to a wide range of people . Although it was historically occupied by several native tribes , the Arawak peoples ( Tainos ) and Carib ( Kalinago ) tribes occupied it at the time European settlers reached the island . `` Massacre River ( Dominica ) '' is a name of a river dedicated to the Kalinago Genocide of 1626 by English settlers on St. Kitts -the survivors were forced into exile on Dominica . Both the French and British tried to claim the island and imported slaves from Africa for labour . The remaining Caribs now live on a territory on the east coast of the island . They elect their own chief . This mix of cultures has produced the current culture .
Music and dance are important facets of Dominica 's culture . The annual independence celebrations display a variety of traditional song and dance . Since 1997 , there have also been weeks of Creole festivals , such as `` Creole in the Park '' and the `` World Creole Music Festival '' .
Dominica gained prominence on the international music stage when in 1973 , Gordon Henderson ( musician ) founded the group Exile One and an original musical genre , which he coined `` Cadence-lypso '' . This paved the way for modern Creole music . Other musical genres include `` Jing ping '' and `` Cadence rampa '' . Jing ping features the accordion and is native to the island . Dominica 's music is a mlange of Haitian , Afro-Cuban , African and European traditions . Popular artists over the years include Chubby and the Midnight Groovers , Bells Combo , the Gaylords , Windward Caribbean Kulture , and Triple Kay .
The 11th annual World creole music Festival was held in 2007 , part of the island 's celebration of independence from Great Britain on 3 November . A year-long reunion celebration began in January 2008 , marking 30 years of independence .
Dominica is often seen as a society that is migrating from collectivism to that of individualism . The economy is a developing one that previously depended on agriculture . Signs of collectivism are evident in the small towns and villages which are spread across the island .
The novelist Jean Rhys was born and raised in Dominica . The island is obliquely depicted in her best-known book , Wide Sargasso Sea . Rhys 's friend , the political activist and writer Phyllis Shand Allfrey , set her 1954 novel , The Orchid House ( novel ) , in Dominica .
Much of the Walt Disney Pictures film Pirates of the Caribbean : Dead Man 's Chest ( the second in the series , released in 2006 ) , was shot on location on Dominica ( though in the film it was known as `` Pelegosto '' , a fictional island ) , along with some shooting for the third film in the series , Pirates of the Caribbean : At World 's End At World 's End ( 2007 ) .
=== Cuisine ===
Dominica 's cuisine is similar to that of other Caribbean islands , particularly Jamaica , Saint Lucia and Trinidad and Tobago . Like other Commonwealth Caribbean islands , Dominicans have developed a distinct twist to their cuisine . Breakfast is an important daily meal , typically including saltfish , dried and salted codfish , and `` bakes '' ( fried dough ) . Saltfish and bakes are combined for a fast food snack that can be eaten throughout the day ; vendors on Dominica 's streets sell these snacks to passersby , together with fried chicken , fish and fruit and yogurt `` smoothies '' . Other breakfast meals include cornmeal porridge , which is made with fine cornmeal or polenta , milk or condensed milk , and sugar to sweeten . Traditional British-influenced dishes , such as eggs , bacon and toast , are also popular , as are fried fish and Plantain ( cooking ) .
Common vegetables include Plantain ( cooking ) , tanias ( a root vegetable ) , sweet potatoes , potatoes , rice and peas . Meat and poultry typically eaten include chicken , beef and fish . These are often prepared in stews with onions , carrots , garlic , ginger and herbs . The vegetables and meat are browned to create a rich dark sauce . Popular meals include rice and peas , brown stew chicken , stew beef , fried and stewed fish , and many different types of hearty fish broths and soups . These are filled with dumplings , carrots and ground provisions .
=== Sports ===
Cricket is a popular sport on the island , and Dominica competes in test cricket as part of the West Indies cricket team . In West Indies domestic first-class cricket , Dominica participates as part of the Windward Islands cricket team , although they are often considered a part of the Leeward Islands geographically . This is due to being part of the British Windward Islands colony from 1940 until independence ; its cricket federation remains a part of the Windward Islands Cricket Board of Control .
On 24 October , 2007 , the 8,000-seat Windsor Park ( Dominica ) was completed with a donation of EC $ 33 ; million ( US $ 17 ; million , euro 12 ; million ) from the government of the People 's Republic of China .
Netball , basketball , Rugby football , tennis and association football are gaining popularity as well .
During the 2014 Winter Olympics , a husband and wife team of Gary di Silvestri and Angela Morrone di Silvestri spent US $ 175,000 to register as Dominican citizens and enter the 15 ; km men 's and 10 ; km women 's Cross-country skiing at the 2014 Winter Olympics cross-country skiing events , respectively . Angela did not start her race , and Gary pulled out several hundred meters into his race . To date , they are Dominica 's only Winter Olympic athletes .
Athlete Jrme Romain won the bronze medal at the 1995 World Championships in Athletics 1995 World Championships in Athletics  Men 's triple jump . He also qualified for the finals at the Athletics at the 1996 Summer Olympics  Men 's triple jump ; even though he had to pull out due to injury , his 12th position is the best performance of a Dominican ever at the Olympic Games .
== Media ==
Dominica has two major newspapers , The Sun and The Chronicle ( Dominica ) . There are two national television stations and a few radio stations , including Stations include : ZBC-AM 590 , the first private local radio station is called Radio En Ba Mango 93.5/96.9FM in the Village of Berricoa Grand Bay and is owned by Urban Dangleben , ZGBC-AM 740 , ZGBC-FM 90.7 ( Portsmouth ) , ZGBC-FM 102.1 ( Roseau ) and ZGBC-FM 106.1 ( Marigot ) , Q95 FM , the Dominica Broadcasting Corporation , and Kairi FM . Before 2004 , there were two telecommunication companies Cable and Wireless ( Caribbean ) and Marpin TV founded by Dominican , Ronald Bernard Maroni Abraham . In 2005 , Digicel and a UK-based company Orange SA started to offer service to the island . There are a number of mobile networks operating on the island ; LIME and Digicel compete for most of Dominica 's wireless customers . Orange shut down in 2010 and is no longer operating on the island of Dominica .
Historical newspapers include The Dominican , The Dominica Guardian , and the Dominica Colonist , available for free in the Digital Library of the Caribbean .
== See also ==
* Index of Dominica-related articles
* List of people from Dominica
* Outline of Dominica
== References ==
== External links ==
* of the Government of the Commonwealth of Dominica .
* Dominican creole or Kwyl ( presentation , vocabulary and conversation guide ) }
*
* Discover Dominica : Nature Island of the Caribbean , official government tourism website by the Discover Dominica Authority .
Category : Dominica
Category : Countries in the Caribbean
Category : Windward Islands
Category : City-states
Category : Colonial government in the West Indies
Category : Commonwealth republics
Category : English-speaking countries and territories
Category : Former French colonies
Category : French Caribbean
Category : Islands of Dominica
Category : Island countries
Category : Member states of the Caribbean Community
Category : Member states of the Commonwealth of Nations
Category : Member states of the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States
Category : Member states of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie
Category : Member states of the United Nations
Category : Small Island Developing States
Category:1690 establishments in the French colonial empire
Category:1690s establishments in the Caribbean
Category:1690 establishments in North America
Category:1805 establishments in the British Empire
Category:1800s establishments in the Caribbean
Category:1805 establishments in North America
Category : States and territories established in 1978
Category:1970s establishments in the Caribbean
Category:1978 establishments in North America
Category : Countries in North America <article_end> <article_start>  
Jamaica ( ) is an island country situated in the Caribbean Sea . Spanning in area , it is the third-largest island of the Greater Antilles and the Caribbean ( after Cuba and Hispaniola ) . Jamaica lies about south of Cuba , and west of Hispaniola ( the island containing the countries of Haiti and the Dominican Republic ) ; the British Overseas Territory of the Cayman Islands lies some to the north-west .
Originally inhabited by the indigenous Arawak and Tano peoples , the island came under Spanish Empire following the arrival of Christopher Columbus in 1494 . Many of the indigenous people were either killed or died of diseases to which they had no immunity , and the Spanish then forcibly transplanted large numbers of African slaves to Jamaica as labourers . The island remained a possession of Spain until 1655 , when England ( later Kingdom of Great Britain ) conquered it , renaming it Jamaica . Under British colonial rule Jamaica became a leading sugar exporter , with a plantation economy dependent on the African slaves and later their descendants . The British fully emancipated all slaves in 1838 , and many freedmen chose to have Subsistence agriculture rather than to work on plantations . Beginning in the 1840s , the British began using Chinese and Indian Indenture labour to work on plantations . The island achieved independence from the United Kingdom on 6 August 1962.
With million people , Jamaica is the third-most populous English-speaking world country in the Americas ( after the United States and Canada ) , and the fourth-most populous country in the Caribbean . Kingston , Jamaica is the country 's capital and largest city . The majority of Jamaicans are of Sub-Saharan African ancestry , with significant White Jamaicans , East Asian people ( primarily Chinese Jamaicans ) , Indo-Jamaicans , Lebanese Jamaicans , and mixed-race minorities . Due to a high rate of emigration for work since the 1960s , there is a large Jamaican diaspora , particularly in Canada , the United Kingdom , and the United States . The country has a global influence that belies its small size ; it was the birthplace of the Rastafari religion , reggae music ( and associated genres such as Dub music , ska and dancehall ) , and it is internationally prominent in sports , most notably cricket , Sprint ( running ) and Sport of athletics .
Jamaica is an upper-middle income country with an economy heavily dependent on tourism ; it has an average of 4.3 million tourists a year . Politically it is a Commonwealth realm , with Elizabeth II as Monarchy of Jamaica . Her appointed representative in the country is the Governor-General of Jamaica , an office held by Patrick Allen ( governor-general ) since 2009 . Andrew Holness has served as Prime Minister of Jamaica since March 2016 . Jamaica is a parliamentary constitutional monarchy with legislative power vested in the bicameral Parliament of Jamaica , consisting of an appointed Senate and a directly elected House of Representatives .
==Etymology==
The Indigenous peoples , the Yamaye ( also known as the Tano ) , called the island Xaymaca in an Arawakan languages , meaning the `` Land of Wood and Water '' or the `` Land of Springs '' .
Colloquially , Jamaicans refer to their home island as the `` Rock '' . Slang names such as `` Jamrock '' , `` Jamdown '' ( `` Jamdung '' in Jamaican Patois ) , or briefly `` Ja '' , have derived from this .
==History==
===Prehistory===
Humans have inhabited Jamaica from as early as 40001000 BC . Little is known of these early peoples . Another group , known as the `` Redware people '' after their pottery , arrived circa 600 AD , followed by the ArawakTano circa 800 AD , who most likely came from South America . They practised an agrarian and fishing economy , and at their height are thought to have numbered some 60,000 people , grouped into around 200 villages headed by caciques ( chiefs ) . The south coast of Jamaica was the most populated , especially around the area now known as Old Harbour .
Though often thought to have become extinct following contact with Europeans , the Tano in fact still inhabited Jamaica when the English took control of the island in 1655 . Some fled into interior regions , merging with African Jamaican Maroons communities . Today , only a tiny number of Jamaican natives , known as Yamaye , remain . The Jamaican National Heritage Trust is attempting to locate and document any remaining evidence of the Tano .
===Spanish rule ( 15091655 ) ===
Christopher Columbus was the first European to see Jamaica , claiming the island for Spain after landing there in 1494 on his second voyage to the Americas . His probable landing point was Dry Harbour , called Discovery Bay , Jamaica , and Saint Ann Parish St. Ann 's Bay was named `` Saint Gloria '' by Columbus , as the first sighting of the land . He later returned in 1503 ; however , he was shipwrecked and he and his crew were forced to live on Jamaica for a year whilst waiting to be rescued .
One and a half kilometres west of St. Ann 's Bay is the site of the first Spanish settlement on the island , Sevilla la Nueva ( Jamaica ) , which was established in 1509 by Juan de Esquivel but abandoned around 1524 because it was deemed unhealthy . The capital was moved to Spanish Town , then called St. Jago de la Vega , around 1534 ( at present-day St. Catherine ) . Meanwhile , the Tanos began dying in large numbers , from both introduced diseases to which they had no immunity , and from enslavement by the Spanish . As a result , the Spanish began importing slaves from Africa to the island .
Many slaves managed to escape , forming autonomous communities in remote and easily defended areas in the interior of Jamaica , mixing with the remaining Taino ; these communities became known as Jamaican Maroons . Small numbers of Jews also came to live on the island . By the early 17th century it is estimated that no more than 2,5003,000 people lived on Jamaica .
===Early British period===
The English began taking an interest in the island and , following a failed attempt to conquer Santo Domingo on Hispaniola , William Penn ( admiral ) and General Robert Venables led an invasion of Jamaica in 1655 . Battles at Battle of Ocho Rios and the Battle of Rio Nuevo resulted in Spanish defeats ; in 1660 the Maroon community under the leadership of Juan de Bolas switched sides from the Spanish , and began supporting the English . With their help , the Spanish defeat was secured .
When the English captured Jamaica , most Spanish colonists fled , with the exception of Spanish Jews , who chose to remain in the island . Spanish slave holders freed their slaves before leaving Jamaica . Many slaves dispersed into the mountains , joining the already established maroon ( people ) communities . During the centuries of slavery , Jamaican Maroons established free communities in the mountainous interior of Jamaica , where they maintained their freedom and independence for generations , under the leadership of Maroon leaders such as Juan de Serras .
Meanwhile , the Spanish made several attempts to re-capture the island , prompting the British to support pirates attacking Spanish ships in the Caribbean ; as a result piracy became rampant on Jamaica , with the city of Port Royal becoming notorious for its lawlessness . Spain later recognised English possession of the island with the Treaty of Madrid ( 1670 ) . As a result , the English authorities sought to rein in the worst excesses of the pirates .
In 1660 , the population of Jamaica was about 4,500 white and 1,500 black . By the early 1670s , as the English developed sugar cane plantations worked by large numbers of slaves , black Africans formed a majority of the population . The Irish people in Jamaica also formed a large part of the island 's early population , making up two-thirds of the white population on the island in the late 17th century , twice that of the English population . They were brought in as indentured labourers and soldiers after the conquest of 1655 . The majority of Irish were transported by force as political prisoners of war from Ireland as a result of the ongoing Wars of the Three Kingdoms . Migration of large numbers of Irish to the island continued into the 18th century .
A limited form of local government was introduced with the creation of the House of Assembly of Jamaica in 1664 ; however , it represented only a tiny number of rich plantation owners . In 1692 , the colony was rocked by an 1692 Jamaica earthquake that resulted in several thousand deaths and the almost complete destruction of Port Royal .
===18th19th centuries===
During the 1700s the economy boomed , based largely on sugar and other crops such as coffee , cotton and indigo . All these crops were worked by black slaves , who lived short and often brutal lives with no rights , being the property of a small planter-class . In the 18th century , slaves ran away and joined the Maroons in increasing numbers , and resulted in The First Maroon War ( 1728  1739/40 ) , which ended in stalemate . The British government sued for peace , and signed treaties with the Leeward Maroons led by Cudjoe and Accompong in 1739 , and the Windward Maroons led by Quao and Queen Nanny in 1740.
A large slave rebellion , known as Tacky 's War , broke out in 1760 but was defeated by the British and their Maroon allies . After the Second Maroon War in 179596 , many Maroons from the Maroon town of Cudjoe 's Town ( Trelawny Town ) were expelled to Nova Scotia and , later , Sierra Leone . Many slaves ran away and formed independent communities under the leadership of escaped slaves such as Three Fingered Jack ( Jamaica ) Three-Fingered Jack , Cuffee and at Me-no-Sen-You-no-Come .
By the beginning of the 19th century , Jamaica 's dependence on slave labour and a plantation economy had resulted in black people outnumbering white people by a ratio of almost 20 to 1 . Although the British had outlawed the importation of slaves , some were still smuggled in from Spanish colonies and directly . While planning the abolition of slavery , the British Parliament passed laws to improve conditions for slaves . They banned the use of whips in the field and flogging of women ; informed planters that slaves were to be allowed religious instruction , and required a free day during each week when slaves could sell their produce , prohibiting Sunday markets to enable slaves to attend church . The House of Assembly in Jamaica resented and resisted the new laws . Members , with membership then restricted to European-Jamaicans , claimed that the slaves were content and objected to Parliament 's interference in island affairs . Slave owners feared possible revolts if conditions were lightened .
The British Slave Trade Act 1807 in 1807 , but not the institution itself . In 1831 a huge slave rebellion , known as Baptist War , broke out , led by the Baptist preacher Samuel Sharpe . The rebellion resulted in hundreds of deaths , the destruction of many plantations , and resulted in ferocious reprisals by the plantocracy class . As a result of rebellions such as these , as well as the efforts of abolitionists , the British outlawed slavery in its empire in 1834 , with full Abolitionism in the United Kingdom from chattel slavery declared in 1838 . The population in 1834 was 371,070 , of whom 15,000 were white , 5,000 free black ; 40,000 'coloured ' or free people of color ( mixed race ) ; and 311,070 were slaves . The resulting labour shortage prompted the British to begin to `` import '' indentured servants to supplement the labour pool , as many freedmen resisted working on the plantations . Workers recruited from India began arriving in 1845 , Chinese workers in 1854 . Many South Asian and Chinese descendants continue to reside in Jamaica today .
Over the next 20 years , several epidemics of cholera , scarlet fever , and smallpox hit the island , killing almost 60,000 people ( about 10 per day ) . Nevertheless , in 1871 the census recorded a population of 506,154 people , 246,573 of which were males , and 259,581 females . Their races were recorded as 13,101 white , 100,346 coloured ( mixed black and white ) , and 392,707 black . This period was marked by an economic slump , with many Jamaicans living in poverty . Dissatisfaction with this , and continued racial discrimination and marginalisation of the black majority , led to the outbreak of the Morant Bay rebellion in 1865 led by Paul Bogle , which was put down by Governor Edward John Eyre with such brutality that he was recalled from his position . His successor , John Peter Grant , enacted a series of social , financial and political reforms whilst aiming to uphold firm British rule over the island , which became a Crown Colony in 1866 . In 1872 the capital was transferred from Spanish Town to Kingston .
===Early 20th century===
In 1907 Jamaica was struck by 1907 Kingston earthquake  this , and the subsequent fire , caused immense destruction in Kingston and the deaths of 8001,000 people .
Unemployment and poverty remained a problem for many Jamaicans . Various movements seeking political change arose as a result , most notably the Universal Negro Improvement Association and African Communities League founded by Marcus Garvey in 1917 . As well as seeking greater political rights and an improvement for the condition of workers , Garvey was also a prominent Pan-Africanist and proponent of the Back-to-Africa movement . He was also one of the chief inspirations behind Rastafari , a religion founded in Jamaica in the 1930s that combined Christianity with an Afrocentric theology focused on the figure of Haile Selassie , Emperor of Ethiopia . Despite occasional persecution , Rastafari grew to become an established faith on the island , later spreading abroad .
The Great Depression of the 1930s hit Jamaica hard . As part of the British West Indian labour unrest of 193439 , Jamaica saw numerous strikes , culminating in a strike in 1938 that turned into a full-blown riot .
As a result , the British government instituted Report of West India Royal Commission ( Moyne Report ) to look into the causes of the disturbances ; their report recommended political and economic reforms in Britain 's Caribbean colonies . A new House of Representatives was established in 1944 , elected by universal adult suffrage . During this period Jamaica 's two-party system emerged , with the creation of the Jamaican Labour Party ( JLP ) under Alexander Bustamante and the People 's National Party ( PNP ) under Norman Manley .
Jamaica slowly gained increasing autonomy from the United Kingdom . In 1958 it became a province in the Federation of the West Indies , a federation of several of British West Indies Britain 's Caribbean colonies . Membership of the Federation proved to be divisive , however , and a 1961 Jamaican Federation of the West Indies membership referendum on the issue saw a slight majority voting to leave . After leaving the Federation , Jamaica attained full Independence of Jamaica on 6 August 1962 . The new state retained , however , its membership in the Commonwealth of Nations ( with the Queen as head of state ) and adopted a Westminster parliamentary system Westminster-style parliamentary system . Bustamante , at the age of 78 , became the country 's first Prime Minister of Jamaica .
===Post-independence era===
Strong economic growth , averaging approximately 6 % per annum , marked the first ten years of independence under conservative JLP governments ; these were led by successive Prime Ministers Alexander Bustamante , Donald Sangster ( who died of natural causes within two months of taking office ) and Hugh Shearer . The growth was fuelled by high levels of private investment in bauxite/alumina , tourism , the manufacturing industry and , to a lesser extent , the agricultural sector . In the 1967 Jamaican general election , the JLP were victorious again , winning 33 out of 53 seats , with the PNP taking 20 seats .
In terms of foreign policy Jamaica became a member of the Non-Aligned Movement , seeking to retain strong ties with Britain and the United States whilst also developing links with Communist states such as Cuba .
The optimism of the first decade was accompanied by a growing sense of inequality among many Afro-Jamaicans , and a concern that the benefits of growth were not being shared by the urban poor , many of whom ended up living in crime-ridden shanty towns in Kingston . This , combined with the effects of a slowdown in the global economy in 1970 , led to the voters 1972 Jamaican general election under Michael Manley in 1972 . The PNP won 37 seats to the JLP 's 16.
Manley 's government enacted various social reforms , such as a higher minimum wage , land reform , legislation for women 's equality , greater housing construction and an increase in educational provision . Internationally he improved ties with the Communist bloc and vigorously opposed the apartheid regime in South Africa .
In 1976 , the PNP won another landslide , winning 47 seats to the JLP 's 13 . The turnout was a very high 85 percent . However , the economy faltered in this period due to a combination of internal and external factors ( such as the oil shocks ) . The rivalry between the JLP and PNP became intense , and Jamaican political conflict political and gang-related violence grew significantly in this period .
By 1980 , Jamaica 's gross national product had declined to some 25 % below its 1972 level . Seeking change , Jamaicans voted the JLP 1980 Jamaican general election in 1980 under Edward Seaga , the JLP winning 51 seats to the PNP 's nine seats . Firmly anti-Communist , Seaga cut ties with Cuba and sent troops to support the US invasion of Grenada in 1983 . The economic deterioration , however , continued into the mid-1980s , exacerbated by a number of factors . The largest and third-largest alumina producers , Alpart and Alcoa , closed ; and there was a significant reduction in production by the second-largest producer , Alcan . Reynolds Jamaica Mines , Ltd. left the Jamaican industry . There was also a decline in tourism , which was important to the economy . Owing to rising foreign and local debt , accompanied by large fiscal deficits , the government sought International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) financing , which was dependent on implementing various austerity measures . These resulted in strikes in 1985 and a decline in support for the Seaga government , exacerbated by criticism of the government 's response to the devastation caused by Hurricane Gilbert in 1988 . Having now de-emphasised socialism and adopting a more centrist position , Michael Manley and the PNP were 1989 Jamaican general election re-elected in 1989 , winning 45 seats to the JLP 's 15.
The PNP went on to win a string of elections , under Prime Ministers Michael Manley ( 19891992 ) , P. J. Patterson ( 19922005 ) and Portia Simpson-Miller ( 20052007 ) . In the 1993 Jamaican general election , Patterson led the PNP to victory , winning 52 seats to the JLP 's eight seats . Patterson also won the 1997 Jamaican general election , by another landslide margin of 50 seats to the JLP 's 10 seats . Patterson 's third consecutive victory came in the 2002 Jamaican general election , when the PNP retained power , but with a reduced seat majority of 34 seats to 26 . Patterson stepped down on 26 February 2006 , and was replaced by Portia Simpson-Miller , Jamaica 's first female Prime Minister . The turnout slowly declined during this period of time , from 67.4 % in 1993 to 59.1 % in 2002.
During this period various economic reforms were introduced , such as deregulating the finance sector and floating the Jamaican dollar , as well as greater investment in infrastructure , whilst also retaining a strong social safety net . Political violence , so prevalent in the previous two decades , declined significantly .
In 2007 Jamaican general election the PNP was defeated by the JLP by a narrow margin of 32 seats to 28 , with a turnout of 61.46 % . This election ended 18 years of PNP rule , and Bruce Golding became the new prime minister . Golding 's tenure ( 2007-2010 ) was dominated by the effects of the Great Recession , as well as the fallout from 2010 Kingston unrest by Jamaican police and military to arrest drug lord Christopher Coke in 2010 which erupted in violence , resulting in over 70 deaths . As a result of this incident Golding resigned and was replaced by Andrew Holness in 2011.
Independence , however widely celebrated in Jamaica , has been questioned in the early 21st century . In 2011 , a survey showed that approximately 60 % of Jamaicans believe that the country would have been better off had it remained a British colony , with only 17 % believing it would have been worse off , citing as problems years of social and fiscal mismanagement in the country . However , this poll reflected a greater discontent with the JLP handling of crime and the economy , and as a result , Holness and the JLP were defeated in the 2011 Jamaican general election , which saw Portia Simpson-Miller and the PNP return to power . The number of seats had been increased to 63 , and the PNP swept to power with a landslide 42 seats to the JLP 's 21 . The voter turnout was 53.17 % .
Holness 's JLP won the 2016 Jamaican general election general election narrowly , defeating Simpson-Miller 's PNP , on 25 February . The PNP won 31 seats to the JLP 's 32 . As a result , Simpson-Miller became Opposition Leader for a second time . The voter turnout dipped below 50 % for the first time , registering just 48.37 % .
In the 2020 Jamaican general election , Andrew Holness made history for the JLP by accomplishing a second consecutive win for the Jamaica Labour Party , winning 49 seats to 14 won by the PNP , led this time by Peter Phillips ( politician ) . The last time a consecutive win occurred for the JLP was in 1980 . However , the turnout at this election was just 37 % , probably affected by the coronavirus pandemic .
==Government and politics==
Jamaica is a parliamentary system and constitutional monarchy . The head of state is the Queen of Jamaica ( currently Elizabeth II ) , represented locally by the Governor-General of Jamaica . The governor-general is nominated by the Prime Minister of Jamaica and the entire Cabinet and then formally appointed by the monarch . All the members of the Cabinet are appointed by the governor-general on the advice of the prime minister . The monarch and the governor-general serve largely ceremonial roles , apart from their reserve powers for use in certain constitutional crisis situations . The position of the monarch has been a matter of Republicanism in Jamaica in Jamaica for many years ; currently both major political parties are committed to transitioning to a republic with a president .
Jamaica 's current Constitution of Jamaica was drafted in 1962 by a bipartisan joint committee of the Jamaican legislature . It came into force with the Jamaica Independence Act , 1962 of the Parliament of the United Kingdom , which gave Jamaica independence .
The Parliament of Jamaica is Bicameralism , consisting of the House of Representatives ( Lower House ) and the Senate ( Upper House ) . Members of the House ( known as Members of Parliament or MPs ) are directly elected , and the member of the House of Representatives who , in the governor-general 's best judgement , is best able to command the confidence of a majority of the members of that House , is appointed by the governor-general to be the prime minister . Senators are nominated jointly by the prime minister and the parliamentary Opposition ( parliamentary ) and are then appointed by the governor-general .
The Judiciary of Jamaica operates on a common law system derived from English law and Commonwealth of Nations precedents . The court of final appeal is the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council , though during the 2000s parliament attempted to replace it with the Caribbean Court of Justice .
===Political parties and elections===
Jamaica has traditionally had a two-party system , with power often alternating between the People 's National Party ( PNP ) and Jamaica Labour Party ( JLP ) . The party with current administrative and legislative power is the Jamaica Labour Party , after its 2020 victory . There are also several minor parties who have yet to gain a seat in parliament ; the largest of these is the National Democratic Movement ( Jamaica ) ( NDM ) .
===Administrative divisions===
Jamaica is divided into 14 Parishes of Jamaica , which are grouped into three historic Counties of Jamaica that have no administrative relevance .
In the context of local government the parishes are designated `` Local Authorities '' . These local authorities are further styled as `` Municipal Corporations '' , which are either city municipalities or town municipalities . Any new city municipality must have a population of at least 50,000 , and a town municipality a number set by the Minister of Local Government . There are currently no town municipalities .
The local governments of the parishes of Kingston and St. Andrews are consolidated as the city municipality of Kingston & St. Andrew Municipal Corporation . The newest city municipality created is the Municipality of Portmore in 2003 . While it is geographically located within the parish of St. Catherine , it is governed independently .
===Military===
The Jamaica Defence Force ( JDF ) is the small but professional military force of Jamaica . The JDF is based on the British military model with similar organisation , training , weapons and traditions . Once chosen , officer candidates are sent to one of several British or Canadian basic officer courses depending on the arm of service . Enlisted soldiers are given basic training at Up Park Camp or JDF Training Depot , Newcastle , both in St. Andrew . As with the British model , NCOs are given several levels of professional training as they rise up the ranks . Additional military schools are available for speciality training in Canada , the United States and the United Kingdom .
The JDF is directly descended from the British Army 's West India Regiment formed during the colonial era . The West India Regiment was used extensively by the British Empire in policing the empire from 1795 to 1926 . Other units in the JDF heritage include the early colonial Jamaica Militia , the Kingston Infantry Volunteers of WWI and reorganised into the Jamaican Infantry Volunteers in World War II . The West Indies Regiment was reformed in 1958 as part of the West Indies Federation , after dissolution of the Federation the JDF was established .
The Jamaica Defence Force ( JDF ) comprises an The Jamaica Regiment and Reserve Corps , an Air Wing , a Coast Guard fleet and a supporting Engineering Unit . The infantry regiment contains the 1st , 2nd and 3rd ( National Reserve ) battalions . The JDF Air Wing is divided into three flight units , a training unit , a support unit and the JDF Air Wing ( National Reserve ) . The Coast Guard is divided between seagoing crews and support crews who conduct maritime safety and maritime law enforcement as well as defence-related operations .
The role of the support battalion is to provide support to boost numbers in combat and issue competency training in order to allow for the readiness of the force . The 1st Engineer Regiment was formed due to an increased demand for military engineers and their role is to provide engineering services whenever and wherever they are needed . The Headquarters JDF contains the JDF Commander , Command Staff as well as Intelligence , Judge Advocate office , Administrative and Procurement sections .
In recent years the JDF has been called on to assist the nation 's police , the Jamaica Constabulary Force ( JCF ) , in fighting drug smuggling and a rising crime rate which includes one of the highest murder rates in the world . JDF units actively conduct armed patrols with the JCF in high-crime areas and known gang neighbourhoods . There has been vocal controversy as well as support of this JDF role . In early 2005 , an Opposition leader , Edward Seaga , called for the merger of the JDF and JCF . This has not garnered support in either organisation nor among the majority of citizens . In 2017 , Jamaica signed the UN treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons .
==Geography and environment==
Jamaica is the third largest island in the Caribbean . It lies between latitudes 17th parallel north 17 and 19th parallel north 19N , and longitudes 76th meridian west 76 and 79th meridian west 79W . Mountains dominate the interior : the Don Figuerero , Santa Cruz , and May Day mountains in the west , the Dry Harbour Mountains in the centre , and the John Crow Mountains and Blue Mountains ( Jamaica ) in the east , the latter containing Blue Mountain Peak , Jamaica 's tallest mountain at 2,256 m. They are surrounded by a narrow coastal plain . Jamaica only has two cities , the first being Kingston , Jamaica , the capital city and centre of business , located on the south coast and the second being Montego Bay , one of the best known cities in the Caribbean for tourism , located on the north coast . Kingston Harbour is the seventh-largest natural harbour in the world , which contributed to the city being designated as the capital in 1872 . Other towns of note include Portmore , Jamaica , Spanish Town , Savanna la Mar , Mandeville , Jamaica and the resort towns of Ocho Ros , Port Antonio and Negril .
Tourist attractions include Dunn 's River Falls in St. Ann , YS Falls in St. Elizabeth , the Blue Lagoon in Portland Parish , believed to be the crater of an extinct volcano , and Port Royal , site of 1692 Jamaica earthquake that helped form the island 's Palisadoes tombolo .
Among the variety of terrestrial , aquatic and marine ecosystems are dry and wet limestone forests , rainforest , riparian woodland , wetlands , caves , rivers , seagrass beds and coral reefs . The authorities have recognised the tremendous significance and potential of the environment and have designated some of the more 'fertile ' areas as 'protected ' . Among the island 's protected areas are the Cockpit Country , Jamaican dry forests , and Litchfield forest reserves . In 1992 , Jamaica 's first marine park , covering nearly , was established in Montego Bay . Portland Bight Protected Area was designated in 1999 . The following year Blue and John Crow Mountains National Park was created , covering roughly of a wilderness area which supports thousands of tree and fern species and rare animals .
There are several small islands off Jamaica 's coast , most notably those in Portland Bight such as Pigeon Island ( Jamaica ) , Salt Island ( Jamaica ) , Dolphin Island ( Jamaica ) , Long Island ( Jamaica ) , Great Goat Island and Little Goat Island , and also Lime Cay located further east . Much further out  some 5080 ; km off the south coast  lie the very small Morant Cays and Pedro Cays .
===Climate===
The climate in Jamaica is tropical , with hot and humid weather , although higher inland regions are more temperate . Some regions on the south coast , such as the Liguanea Plain and the Pedro Plains , are relatively dry rain shadow rain-shadow areas .
Jamaica lies in the [ belt ] of the Atlantic Ocean and because of this , the island sometimes suffers significant storm damage . Hurricanes Hurricane Charlie ( 1951 ) and Hurricane Gilbert hit Jamaica directly in 1951 and 1988 , respectively , causing major damage and many deaths . In the 2000s ( decade ) , hurricanes Hurricane Ivan , Hurricane Dean ( 2007 ) , and Hurricane Gustav also brought severe weather to the island .
===Flora and fauna===
Jamaica 's climate is tropical , supporting diverse ecosystems with a wealth of plants and animals . Its plant life has changed considerably over the centuries ; when the Spanish arrived in 1494 , except for small agricultural clearings , the country was deeply forested . The European settlers cut down the great timber trees for building and ships ' supplies , and cleared the plains , savannas , and mountain slopes for intense agricultural cultivation . Many new plants were introduced including sugarcane , bananas , and citrus trees .
Jamaica is home to about 3,000 species of flowering plant ( of which over 1,000 are endemism and 200 are species of Orchidaceae ) , thousands of species of non-flowering flora , and about 20 botanical gardens , some of which are several hundred years old . Areas of heavy rainfall also contain stands of bamboo , ferns , ebony , mahogany , and rosewood . Cactus and similar dry-area plants are found along the south and southwest coastal area . Parts of the west and southwest consist of large grasslands , with scattered stands of trees . Jamaica is home to three terrestrial ecoregions , the Jamaican moist forests , Jamaican dry forests , and Greater Antilles mangroves . It had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 5.01/10 , ranking it 110th globally out of 172 countries .
Jamaican 's fauna , typical of the Caribbean , includes highly diversified wildlife with many endemic species . As with other oceanic islands , land mammals are mostly several species of bats of which at least three endemic species are found only in Cockpit Country , one of which is at-risk . Other species of bat include the Jamaican fig-eating bat fig-eating and lasiurus hairy-tailed bats . The only non-bat native mammal extant in Jamaica is the Jamaican hutia , locally known as the coney . Introduced mammals such as wild boar and the small Asian mongoose are also common . Jamaica is also home to about 50 species of reptiles , the largest of which is the American crocodile ; however , it is only present within the Black River and a few other areas . Lizards such as anoles , iguanas and snakes such as racers and the Jamaican boa ( the largest snake on the island ) , are common in areas such as the Cockpit Country . None of Jamaica 's eight species of native snakes is venomous .
Jamaica is home to about 289 species of birds of which 27 are endemic including the endangered black-billed amazon black-Billed parrots and the Jamaican blackbird , both of which are only found in Cockpit Country . It is also the indigenous home to four species of [ ( three of which are found nowhere else in the world ) : the black-billed streamertail ] , the [ [ Jamaican mango , the Vervain hummingbird , and red-billed streamertails . The red-billed streamertail , known locally as the `` doctor bird '' , is Jamaica 's National Symbol . Other notable species include the Jamaican tody and the Greater flamingo ,
One species of freshwater turtle is native to Jamaica , the Jamaican slider . It is found only on Jamaica and on a few islands in the Bahamas . In addition , many types of frogs are common on the island , especially treefrogs . Beautiful and exotic birds , such as the can be found among a large number of others .
Jamaican waters contain considerable resources of fresh-and saltwater fish . The chief varieties of saltwater fish are King mackerel , Carangidae , mackerel , Whiting ( fish ) , bonito , and tuna . Fish that occasionally enter freshwater and estuarine environments include Centropomidae , Epinephelus itajara , mangrove snapper , and Mullet ( fish ) . Fish that spend the majority of their lives in Jamaica 's fresh waters include many species of livebearers , killifish , freshwater Goby , the mountain mullet , and the American eel . Tilapia have been introduced from Africa for aquaculture , and are very common . Also visible in the waters surrounding Jamaica are dolphins , parrotfish , and the endangered West Indian manatee .
Insects and other invertebrates are abundant , including the world 's largest centipede , the Amazonian giant centipede . Jamaica is the home to about 150 species of butterflies and moths , including 35 indigenous species and 22 subspecies . It is also the native home to the Homerus swallowtail , the western hemisphere 's largest butterfly .
=== Aquatic life ===
Coral reef ecosystems are important because they provide people with a source of livelihood , food , recreation , and medicinal compounds and protect the land on which they live . Jamaica relies on the ocean and its ecosystem for its development . However , the marine life in Jamaica is also being affected . There could be many factors that contribute to marine life not having the best health . Jamaica 's geological origin , topographical features and seasonal high rainfall make it susceptible to a range of natural hazards that can affect the coastal and oceanic environments . These include storm surge , slope failures ( landslides ) , earthquakes , floods and hurricanes . Coral reefs in the Negril Marine Park ( NMP ) , Jamaica , have been increasingly impacted by nutrient pollution and macroalgal blooms following decades of intensive development as a major tourist destination . Another one of those factors could include tourism : being that Jamaica is a very touristy place , the island draws numerous people traveling here from all over the world . The Jamaican tourism industry accounts for 32 % of total employment and 36 % of the country 's GDP and is largely based on the sun , sea and sand , the last two of these attributes being dependent on healthy coral reef ecosystems . Because of Jamaica 's tourism , they have developed a study to see if the tourist would be willing to help financially to manage their marine ecosystem because Jamaica alone is unable to . The ocean connects all the countries all over the world , however , everyone and everything is affecting the flow and life in the ocean . Jamaica is a very touristy place specifically because of their beaches . If their oceans are not functioning at their best then the well-being of Jamaica and the people who live there will start to deteriorate . According to the OECD , oceans contribute $ 1.5 trillion annually in value-added to the overall economy . A developing country on an island will get the majority of their revenue from their ocean .
=== Pollution ===
Pollution comes from run-off , sewage systems , and garbage . However , this typically all ends up in the ocean after there is rain or floods . Everything that ends up in the water changes the quality and balance of the ocean . Poor coastal water quality has adversely affected fisheries , tourism and mariculture , as well as undermining biological sustainability of the living resources of ocean and coastal habitats . Jamaica imports and exports many goods through their waters . Some of the imports that go into Jamaica include petroleum and petroleum products . Issues include accidents at sea ; risk of spills through local and international transport of petroleum and petroleum products . Oil spills can disrupt the marine life with chemicals that are not normally found in the ocean . Other forms of pollution also occur in Jamaica . Solid waste disposal mechanisms in Jamaica are currently inadequate . The solid waste gets into the water through rainfall forces . Solid waste is also harmful to wildlife , particularly birds , fish and turtles that feed at the surface of the water and mistake floating debris for food . For example , plastic can be caught around birds and turtles necks making it difficult to eat and breath as they begin to grow causing the plastic to get tighter around their necks . Pieces of plastic , metal , and glass can be mistaken for the food fish eat . Each Jamaican generates 1 ; kg ( 2 ; lbs ) of waste per day ; only 70 % of this is collected by National Solid Waste Management Authority ( NSWMA )  the remaining 30 % is either burnt or disposed of in gullies/waterways .
=== Environmental policies ===
There are policies that are being put into place to help preserve the ocean and the life below water . The goal of integrated coastal zone management ( ICZM ) is to improve the quality of life of human communities who depend on coastal resources while maintaining the biological diversity and productivity of coastal ecosystems . Developing an underdeveloped country can impact the oceans ecosystem because of all the construction that would be done to develop the country . Over-building , driven by powerful market forces as well as poverty among some sectors of the population , and destructive exploitation contribute to the decline of ocean and coastal resources . Developing practices that will contribute to the lives of the people but also to the life of the ocean and its ecosystem . Some of these practices include : Develop sustainable fisheries practices , ensure sustainable mariculture techniques and practices , sustainable management of shipping , and promote sustainable tourism practices . As for tourism , tourism is the number one source of foreign exchange earnings in Jamaica and , as such is vital to the national economy . Tourist typically go to countries unaware of issues and how they impact those issues . Tourist are not going to be used to living in a different style compared to their own country . Practices such as : provide sewage treatment facilities for all tourist areas , determine carrying capacity of the environment prior to planning tourism activities , provide alternative types of tourist activities can help to get desired results such as the development of alternative tourism which will reduce the current pressure on resources that support traditional tourism activities . A study was conducted to see how tourist could help with sustainable financing for ocean and coastal management in Jamaica . Instead of using tourist fees they would call them environmental fees . This study aims to inform the relevant stakeholders of the feasibility of implementing environmental fees as well as the likely impact of such revenue generating instruments on the current tourist visitation rates to the island . The development of a user fee system would help fund environmental management and protection . The results show that tourists have a high consumer surplus associated with a vacation in Jamaica , and have a significantly lower willingness to pay for a tourism tax when compared to an environmental tax . The findings of the study show that the `` label '' of the tax and as well as the respondent 's awareness of the institutional mechanisms for environmental protection and tourism are important to their decision framework . Tourist are more willing to pay for environmental fees rather than tourist tax fees . A tax high enough to fund for environmental management and protection but low enough to continue to bring tourist to Jamaica . It has been shows that if an environmental tax of $ 1 per person were introduced it would not cause a significant decline in visitation rates and would generate revenues of US $ 1.7M .
==Demographics==
===Ethnic origins===
Jamaica 's diverse ethnic roots are reflected in the national motto Coat of arms of Jamaica 'Out of Many One People ' . Most of the population of 2,812,000 ( July 2018 est . ) are of African or partially African descent , with many being able to trace their origins to the West African countries of Ghana and Nigeria . Other major ancestral areas are Europe , South Asia , and East Asia . It is uncommon for Jamaicans to identify themselves by race as is prominent in other countries such as the United States , with most Jamaicans seeing Jamaican nationality as an identity in and of itself , identifying as simply being 'Jamaican ' regardless of ethnicity . A study found that the average admixture on the island was 78.3 % Sub-Saharan African , 16.0 % White Jamaican , and 5.7 % East Asians . Another study in 2020 showed that Jamaicans of African descent represent 76.3 % of the population , followed by 15.1 % Afro-European , 3.4 % East Indian and Afro-East Indian , 3.2 % Caucasian , 1.2 % Chinese and 0.8 % other .
The Jamaican Maroons of Accompong and other settlements are the descendants of African slaves who fled the plantations for the interior where they set up their own autonomous communities . Many Maroons continue to have their own traditions and speak their own language , known locally as Kromanti .
Asians form the second-largest group and include Indo-Jamaicans and Chinese Jamaicans . Most are descended from indentured workers brought by the British colonial government to fill labour shortages following the abolition of slavery in 1838 . Prominent Indian Jamaicans include jockey Shaun Bridgmohan , who was the first Jamaican in the Kentucky Derby , NBC Nightly News journalist Lester Holt , and Miss Jamaica World and Miss Jamaica Universe winner Yendi Phillips . The southwestern parish of Westmoreland Parish is famous for its large population of Indo-Jamaicans . Along with their Indian counterparts , Chinese Jamaicans have also played an integral part in Jamaica 's community and history . Prominent descendants of this group include Canadian billionaire investor Michael Lee-Chin , supermodels Naomi Campbell and Tyson Beckford , and VP Records founder Vincent `` Randy '' Chin .
There are about 20,000 Jamaicans who have Lebanese Jamaicans and Syrian ancestry . Most were Christian immigrants who fled the Ottoman Empire occupation of Lebanon in the early 19th century . Eventually their descendants became very successful politicians and businessmen . Notable Jamaicans from this group include former Jamaican Prime Minister Edward Seaga , Jamaican politician and former Miss World Lisa Hanna , Jamaican politicians Edward Zacca and Shahine Robinson , and hotelier Abraham Elias Issa .
In 1835 , Charles Ellis , 1st Baron Seaford gave 500 acres of his 10,000 acre estate in Westmoreland for the Seaford Town German settlement . Today most of the town 's descendants are of full or partial German descent .
The first wave of English people immigrants arrived to the island 1655 after conquering the Spanish , and they have historically been the dominant group . Prominent descendants from this group include former Americans Governor of New York David Paterson , Sandals Hotels owner Gordon `` Butch '' Stewart , United States Senior Advisor to the President of the United States and `` mother '' of the Pell Grant Lois Rice , and former National Security Advisor ( United States ) and Ambassador to the United Nations Susan Rice . The first Irish immigrants came to Jamaica in the 1600s as war prisoners and later , indentured labour . Their descendants include two of Order of National Hero ( Jamaica ) Jamaica 's National Heroes : Prime Ministers Michael Manley and Alexander Bustamante . Along with the English people and the Irish people , the Scottish people are another group that has made a significant impact on the island . According to the The Herald ( Glasgow ) , Jamaica has more people using the Campbell surnames than the population of Scotland itself , and it also has the highest percentage of Scottish surnames outside of Scotland . Scottish surnames account to about 60 % of the surnames in the Jamaican phone books . The first Jamaican inhabitants from Scotland were exiled `` rebels '' . Later , they would be followed by ambitious businessmen who spent time between their great country estates in Scotland and the island . As a result , many of the slave owning plantations on the island were owned by Scottish men , and thus a large number of mixed-race Jamaicans can claim Scottish ancestry . High immigration from Scotland continued until well after independence . Today , notable Scottish-Jamaicans include the businessman John Pringle , former American Secretary of State Colin Powell , and American actress Kerry Washington .
There is also a significant Portuguese Jamaican population that is predominantly of Sephardic History of the Jews in Jamaica heritage ; . The first Jews arrived as explorers from Spain in the 15th century after being forced to convert to Christianity or face death . A small number of them became slave owners and even famous pirates . Judaism eventually became very influential in Jamaica and can be seen today with many Jewish cemeteries around the country . During the Holocaust Jamaica became a refuge for Jews fleeing persecution in Europe . Famous Jewish descendants include the dancehall artist Sean Paul , former record producer and founder of Island Records Chris Blackwell , and Jacob De Cordova who was the founder of the The Gleaner ( newspaper ) newspaper .
In recent years immigration has increased , coming mainly from China , Haiti , Cuba , Colombia , and Latin America ; 20,000 Latin Americans reside in Jamaica . In 2016 , the Prime Minister Andrew Holness suggested making Spanish Jamaica 's second official language . About 7,000 United States also reside in Jamaica . Notable American with connection to the island include fashion icon Ralph Lauren , philanthropist Daisy Soros , Blackstone 's Stephen A. Schwarzman , the family of the late Lieutenant Governor of Delaware John W. Rollins , fashion designer Vanessa Noel , investor Guy Stuart , Edward and Patricia Falkenberg , and iHeart Media CEO Robert Pittman ( media executive ) , all of whom hold annual charity events to support the island .
===Languages===
Jamaica is regarded as a bilingual country , with two major languages in use by the population . The official language is Jamaican English , which is `` used in all domains of public life '' , including the government , the legal system , the media , and education . However , the primary spoken language is an English-based creole languages English-based creole called Jamaican Patois ( or Patwa ) . The two exist in a dialect continuum , with speakers using a different register of speech depending on context and whom they are speaking to . 'Pure ' Patois , though sometimes seen as merely a particularly aberrant dialect of English , is essentially mutually unintelligible with standard English and is best thought of a separate language . A 2007 survey by the Jamaican Language Unit found that 17.1 percent of the population were Monolingualism in Jamaican Standard English ( JSE ) , 36.5 percent were monolingual in Patois , and 46.4 percent were bilingual , although earlier surveys had pointed to a greater degree of bilinguality ( up to 90 percent ) . The Jamaican education system has only recently begun to offer formal instruction in Patois , while retaining JSE as the `` official language of instruction '' .
Additionally , some Jamaicans use one or more of Jamaican Sign Language ( JSL ) , American Sign Language ( ASL ) or the indigenous Jamaican Country Sign Language ( Konchri Sain ) . Both JSL and ASL are rapidly replacing Konchri Sain for a variety of reasons .
===Emigration===
Many Jamaicans have emigrated to other countries , especially to the United Kingdom , the United States , and Canada . In the case of the United States , about 20,000 Jamaicans per year are granted permanent residence . There has also been emigration of Jamaicans to other Caribbeans countries such as Cuba , Puerto Rico , Guyana , and The Bahamas . It was estimated in 2004 that up to 2.5 million Jamaicans and Jamaican descendants live abroad .
British Jamaican number an estimated 800,000 making them by far the country 's largest British African-Caribbean community African-Caribbean group . Large-scale migration from Jamaica to the UK occurred primarily in the 1950s and 1960s when the country was still under British rule . Jamaican communities exist in most large UK cities . Concentrations of expatriate Jamaicans are quite considerable in numerous cities in the United States , including New York City , Buffalo , New York , the South Florida metro area , Atlanta , Georgia , Chicago , Illinois , Orlando , Florida , Tampa , Florida , Washington , D.C. , Philadelphia , Hartford , Connecticut , Providence , Rhode Island and Los Angeles , California . In Canada , the Jamaican population is centred in Toronto , with smaller communities in cities such as Hamilton , Ontario , Montreal , Winnipeg , Vancouver and Ottawa . Jamaican Canadians comprise about 30 % of the entire Black Canadians population .
A notable though much smaller group of emigrants are Jamaicans in Ethiopia . These are mostly Rastafarians , in whose theological worldview Africa is the promised land , or 'Zion ' , or more specifically Ethiopia , due to reverence in which former Ethiopian Emperor Haile Selassie is held . Most live in the small town of Shashamane about 150 miles ( 240 ; km ) south of the capital Addis Ababa .
===Crime===
When Jamaica gained independence in 1962 , the murder rate was 3.9 per 100,000 inhabitants , one of the lowest in the world . By 2009 , the rate was 62 per 100,000 inhabitants , one of the highest in the world . Gang violence became a serious problem , with organised crime being centred around Jamaican posses or 'Yardies ' . Jamaica has had one of the highest murder rates in the world for many years , according to United Nations estimates . Some areas of Jamaica , particularly poor areas in Kingston , Jamaica , Montego Bay and elsewhere experience high levels of crime and violence .
However , there were 1,682 reported murders in 2009 and 1,428 in 2010 . After 2011 the murder rate continued to fall , following the downward trend in 2010 , after a strategic programme was launched . In 2012 , the Ministry of National Security reported a 30 percent decrease in murders . Nevertheless , in 2017 murders rose by 22 % over the previous year .
Many Jamaicans are hostile towards LGBT and intersex people , and mob attacks against gay people have been reported . Numerous high-profile dancehall and ragga artists have produced songs featuring explicitly homophobic lyrics . Male homosexuality is LGBT rights by country or territory and punishable by prison time .
===Major cities===
==Religion==
Christianity is the largest religion practised in Jamaica . About 70 % are Protestants ; Roman Catholics are just 2 % of the population . According to the 2001 census , the country 's largest Protestant denominations are the Church of God ( Anderson , Indiana ) ( 24 % ) , Seventh-day Adventist Church ( 11 % ) , Pentecostal ( 10 % ) , Baptist ( 7 % ) , Anglican ( 4 % ) , United Church ( 2 % ) , Methodist ( 2 % ) , Moravian Church ( 1 % ) and Plymouth Brethren ( 1 % ) . Bedwardism is a form of Christianity native to the island , sometime view as a separate faith . The Christian faith gained acceptance as British Christian abolitionists and Baptist missionaries joined educated former slaves in the struggle against slavery .
The Rastafari has 29,026 adherents , according to the 2011 census , with 25,325 Rastafarian males and 3,701 Rastafarian females . The faith originated in Jamaica in the 1930s and though rooted in Christianity it is heavily Afrocentric in its focus , revering figures such as the Jamaican black nationalist Marcus Garvey and Haile Selassie , the former Emperor of Ethiopia . Rastafari has since spread across the globe , especially to areas with large black or African diasporas .
Various faiths and traditional religious practices derived from Africa are practised on the island , notably Kumina , Convince , Myal and Obeah .
Other religions in Jamaica include Jehovah 's Witnesses ] ( 2 % population ) , the [ [ Bah '  Faith in Jamaica Bah '  faith , which counts perhaps 8,000 adherents and 21 Local Spiritual Assembly , Mormonism , Buddhism , and Hinduism in Jamaica . The Hindu Diwali festival is celebrated yearly among the Indo-Jamaican community .
There is also a small population of about 200 Judaism , who describe themselves as Liberal-Conservative . The first Jews in Jamaica trace their roots back to early 15th-century Spain and Portugal . Shaare Shalom Synagogue , also known as the United Congregation of Israelites , is a historic synagogue located in the city of Kingston , Jamaica . Originally built in 1912 , it is the official and only Jewish place of worship left on the island . The once abundant Jewish population has voluntarily converted to Christianity over time . Shaare Shalom is one of the few synagogues in the world that contains sand covered floors and is a popular tourist destination .
Other small groups include Islam in Jamaica , who claim 5,000 adherents . The Muslim holidays of Ashura ( known locally as Hussay or Hosay ) and Muslim holidays have been celebrated throughout the island for hundreds of years . In the past , every plantation in each parish celebrated Hosay . Today it has been called an Indian carnival and is perhaps most well known in Clarendon where it is celebrated each August . People of all religions attend the event , showing mutual respect .
==Culture==
===Music===
Though a small nation , Jamaican culture has a strong global presence . The musical genres reggae , ska , mento , rocksteady , Dub music , and , more recently , dancehall and ragga all originated in the island 's vibrant , popular urban recording industry . These have themselves gone on to influence numerous other genres , such as punk rock ( through reggae and ska ) , dub poetry , New wave music , 2 Tone ( music genre ) two-tone , reggaeton , Oldschool jungle , drum and bass , dubstep , Grime ( music genre ) and American Hip hop music music . Some rappers , such as The Notorious B.I.G. , Busta Rhymes , and Heavy D , are of Jamaican descent .
Bob Marley is probably the best known Jamaican musician ; with his band The Wailers he had a string of hits in 1960s70s , popularising reggae internationally and going on to sell millions of records . Many other internationally known artists were born in Jamaica , including Toots Hibbert , Millie Small , Lee `` Scratch '' Perry , Gregory Isaacs , Half Pint , Protoje , Peter Tosh , Bunny Wailer , Big Youth , Jimmy Cliff , Dennis Brown , Desmond Dekker , Beres Hammond , Beenie Man , Shaggy ( musician ) , Grace Jones , Shabba Ranks , Super Cat , Buju Banton , Sean Paul , I Wayne , Bounty Killer and many others . Bands that came from Jamaica include Black Uhuru , Third World Band , Inner Circle ( reggae band ) , Chalice Reggae Band , Culture ( band ) , Fab Five and Morgan Heritage .
===Literature===
The journalist and author H. G. de Lisser ( 18781944 ) used his native country as the setting for his many novels . Born in Falmouth , Jamaica , de Lisser worked as a reporter for the Jamaica Times at a young age and in 1920 began publishing the magazine Planters ' Punch . The White Witch of Rosehall is one of his better-known novels . He was named Honorary President of the Jamaican Press Association ; he worked throughout his professional career to promote the Jamaican sugar industry .
Roger Mais ( 1905  1955 ) , a journalist , poet , and playwright wrote many short stories , plays , and novels , including The Hills Were Joyful Together ( 1953 ) , Brother Man ( 1954 ) , and Black Lightning ( 1955 ) .
Ian Fleming ( 1908  1964 ) , who had a home in Jamaica where he spent considerable time , repeatedly used the island as a setting in his James Bond novels , including Live and Let Die ( novel ) , Dr. No ( novel ) , `` For Your Eyes Only ( short story ) '' , The Man with the Golden Gun ( novel ) , and Octopussy and The Living Daylights . In addition , James Bond uses a Jamaica-based cover in Casino Royale ( novel ) . So far , the only James Bond film adaptation to have been set in Jamaica is Dr. No ( film ) . Filming for the fictional island of James Bond locations # Locations depicted in films in Live and Let Die ( film ) took place in Jamaica .
Marlon James ( novelist ) ( 1970 ) , novelist has published three novels : John Crow 's Devil ( 2005 ) , The Book of Night Women ( 2009 ) and A Brief History of Seven Killings ( 2014 ) , winner of the 2015 Man Booker Prize .
===Film===
Jamaica has a history in the film industry dating from the early 1960s . A look at delinquent youth in Jamaica is presented in the 1970s musical crime film The Harder They Come , starring Jimmy Cliff as a frustrated ( and psychopathic ) reggae musician who descends into a murderous crime spree . Other notable Jamaican films include Countryman ( film ) , Rockers ( 1978 film ) , Dancehall Queen , One Love ( 2003 film ) , Shottas , Out the Gate ( film ) , Third World Cop and Kingston Paradise . Jamaica is also often used as a filming location , such as the James Bond film Dr. No ( film ) Dr. No ( 1962 ) , Cocktail ( 1988 film ) ( 1988 ) starring Tom Cruise , and the 1993 Disney comedy Cool Runnings , which is loosely based on the true story of Jamaica 's first bobsled team trying to make it in the Winter Olympics .
===Cuisine===
The island is famous for its Jamaican jerk spice , curry and rice and peas which is integral to Jamaican cuisine . Jamaica is also home to Red Stripe beer and Jamaican Blue Mountain Coffee .
===National symbols===
( From the Jamaica Information Service )
* National bird : red-billed streamertail ( also called doctor bird ) ( a [ Trochilus polytmus )
* National flower  lignum vitae ] ( Guiacum officinale )
* National tree : [ [ Talipariti elatum ( Hibiscus talipariti elatum )
* National fruit : ackee ( Blighia sapida )
* National motto : `` Out of Many , One People . ''
===Sport===
Sport is an integral part of national life in Jamaica and the island 's athletes tend to perform to a standard well above what might ordinarily be expected of such a small country . While the most popular local sport is cricket , on the international stage Jamaicans have tended to do particularly well at track and field athletics .
Jamaica has produced some of the world 's most famous cricketers , including George Headley , Courtney Walsh , and Michael Holding . The country was one of the venues of 2007 Cricket World Cup and the West Indies cricket team is one of 10 International Cricket Council full member teams that participate in international Test cricket . The Jamaica national cricket team competes regionally , and also provides players for the West Indies team . Sabina Park is the only Test venue in the island , but the Greenfield Stadium ( Trelawny ) is also used for cricket . Chris Gayle is the most renowned batsman from Jamaica currently representing the West Indies cricket team .
Since independence Jamaica has consistently produced world class athletes in track and field . In Jamaica involvement in athletics begins at a very young age and most high schools maintain rigorous athletics programs with their top athletes competing in national competitions ( most notably the VMBS Girls and Boys Athletics Championships ) and international meets ( most notably the Penn Relays ) . In Jamaica it is not uncommon for young athletes to attain press coverage and national fame long before they arrive on the international athletics stage .
Over the past six decades Jamaica has produced dozens of world class sprinters including Olympic and World Champion Usain Bolt , world record holder in the 100m for men at 9.58s , and 200m for men at 19.19s . Other noteworthy Jamaican sprinters include Arthur Wint , the first Jamaican Olympic gold medalist ; Donald Quarrie , Elaine Thompson double Olympic champion from Rio 2016 in the 100m and 200m , Olympic Champion and former 200m world record holder ; Roy Anthony Bridge , part of the International Olympic Committee ; Merlene Ottey ; Delloreen Ennis-London ; Shelly-Ann Fraser Shelly-Ann Fraser-Pryce , the former World and two time Olympic 100m Champion ; Kerron Stewart ; Aleen Bailey ; Juliet Cuthbert ; three-time Olympic gold medalist ; Veronica Campbell-Brown ; Sherone Simpson ; Brigitte Foster-Hylton ; Yohan Blake ; Herb McKenley ; George Rhoden , Olympic gold medalist ; Deon Hemmings , Olympic gold medalist ; as well as Asafa Powell , former 100m world record holder and 2x 100m Olympic finalist and gold medal winner in the men 's 2008 Olympic 4  100 m. American Olympic winner Sanya Richards-Ross was also born in Jamaica .
Jamaica has also produced several world class amateur and professional boxers including Trevor Berbick and Mike McCallum . First-generation Jamaican athletes have continued to make a significant impact on the sport internationally , especially in the United Kingdom where the list of top British boxers born in Jamaica or of Jamaican parents includes Lloyd Honeyghan , Chris Eubank , Audley Harrison , David Haye , Lennox Lewis and Frank Bruno , Donovan Ruddock Donovan `` Razor '' Ruddock , Mike Tyson , and Floyd Mayweather Jr. , whose maternal grandfather is Jamaican .
Association football and [ are other popular sports in Jamaica . The Jamaica National Football Team national football team ] qualified for the 1998 [ [ FIFA World Cup . Horse racing was Jamaica 's first sport . It was brought in the 1700s by British immigrants to satisfy their longing for their favorite pastime back at home . During slavery , the Afro-Jamaican slaves were considered the best horse jockeys . Today , horse racing provides jobs for about 20,000 people including horse breeders , groomers , and trainers . Also , several Jamaicans are known internationally for their success in horse racing including Richard DePass , who once held the Guinness Book of World Records for the most wins in a day , Canadian awards winner George HoSang , and American award winners Charlie Hussey , Andrew Ramgeet , and Barrington Harvey . Also , there are hundreds of Jamaicans who are employed in the United States , Canada , and the United Kingdom as exercise riders and groomers .
Race car driving is also a popular sport in Jamaica with several car racing tracks and racing associations across the country .
The Jamaica national bobsled team was once a serious contender in the Winter Olympics , beating many well-established teams . Chess and basketball are widely played in Jamaica and are supported by the Jamaica Chess Federation ( JCF ) and the Jamaica Basketball Federation ( JBF ) , respectively . Netball is also very popular on the island , with the Jamaica national netball team called The Sunshine Girls consistently ranking in the top five in the world .
Rugby league has been played in Jamaica since 2006.
The Jamaica national rugby league team is made up of players who play in Jamaica and from United Kingdom based professional and semi professional clubs ( notably in the Super League and Championship ( rugby league ) ) . In November 2018 for the first time ever , the Jamaican rugby league team qualified for the Rugby League World Cup after defeating the United States national rugby league team & Canada national rugby league team . Jamaica will play in the 2021 Rugby League World Cup in England .
According to ESPN , the highest paid Jamaican professional athlete in 2011 was Justin Masterson , starting pitcher for the baseball team Cleveland Indians in the United States .
==Education==
The emancipation of the slaves heralded the establishment of an education system for the masses . Prior to emancipation there were few schools for educating locals and many sent their children off to England to access quality education . After emancipation the West Indian Commission granted a sum of money to establish Elementary Schools , now known as All Age Schools . Most of these schools were established by the churches . This was the genesis of the modern Jamaican school system .
Presently the following categories of schools exist :
* Early childhood  Basic , infant and privately operated pre-school . Age cohort : 2  5 years .
* Primary  Publicly and privately owned ( privately owned being called preparatory schools ) . Ages 3  12 years .
* Secondary  Publicly and privately owned . Ages 10  19 years . The high schools in Jamaica may be either single-sex or co-educational institutions , and many schools follow the traditional Sixth form used throughout the British West Indies .
* Tertiary  Community colleges ; teachers ' colleges , with the Mico Teachers ' College ( now The MICO University College ) being the oldest , founded in 1836 ; the Shortwood Teachers ' College ( which was once an all-female teacher training institution ) ; vocational training centres , colleges and universities , publicly and privately owned . There are five local universities : the University of the West Indies ( Mona Campus ) ; the University of Technology , Jamaica , formerly The College of Art Science and Technology ( CAST ) ; the Northern Caribbean University , formerly West Indies College ; the University of the Commonwealth Caribbean , formerly the University College of The Caribbean ; and the International University of the Caribbean .
Additionally , there are many community and teacher training colleges .
Education is free from the early childhood to secondary levels . There are also opportunities for those who can not afford further education in the vocational arena , through the Human Employment and Resource Training-National Training Agency ( HEART Trust-NTA ) programme , which is opened to all working age national population and through an extensive scholarship network for the various universities .
Students are taught Spanish in school from the primary level upwards ; about 4045 % of educated people in Jamaica knows some form of Spanish .
==Economy==
Jamaica is a mixed economy with both state enterprises and private sector businesses . Major sectors of the Jamaican economy include agriculture , mining , manufacturing , tourism , petroleum refining processes , financial and insurance services . Tourism and mining are the leading earners of foreign exchange market . Half the Jamaican economy relies on services , with half of its income coming from services such as tourism . An estimated 4.3 million foreign tourists visit Jamaica every year . According to the World Bank , Jamaica is an upper-middle income country that , like its Caribbean neighbours , is vulnerable to the effects of climate change , flooding , and hurricanes . In 2018 , Jamaica represented the Caribbean Community at the G20 and the Group of Seven annual meetings . In 2019 Jamaica reported its lowest unemployment rate in 50 years .
Supported by multilateral financial institutions , Jamaica has , since the early 1980s , sought to implement structural reforms aimed at fostering private sector activity and increasing the role of market forces in resource allocation Since 1991 , the government has followed a programme of economic liberalisation and stabilisation by removing exchange controls , floating the exchange rate , cutting tariffs , stabilising the Jamaican dollar , reducing inflation and removing restrictions on foreign direct investment . Emphasis has been placed on maintaining strict fiscal discipline , greater openness to trade and financial flows , market liberalisation and reduction in the size of government . During this period , a large share of the economy was returned to private sector ownership through divestment and privatisation programmes . The free-trade zones at Kingston , Montego Bay and Spanish Town allow duty-free importation , tax-free profits , and free repatriation of export earnings .
Jamaica 's economy grew strongly after the years of independence , but then stagnated in the 1980s , due to the heavy falls in price of bauxite and fluctuations in the price of agriculture . The financial sector was troubled in 1994 , with many banks and insurance companies suffering heavy losses and liquidity problems . According to the Commonwealth of Nations Secretariat , `` The government set up the Financial Sector Adjustment Company ( Finsac ) in January 1997 to assist these banks and companies , providing funds in return for equity , and acquired substantial holdings in banks and insurance companies and related companies , .. but it only exasperated the problem , and brought the country into large external debt . From 2001 , once it had restored these banks and companies to financial health , Finsac divested them . '' The Government of Jamaica remains committed to lowering inflation , with a long-term objective of bringing it in line with that of its major trading partners .
In 1996 and 1997 there was a decrease in GDP largely due to significant problems in the financial sector and , in 1997 , a severe island-wide drought ( the worst in 70 years ) and hurricane that drastically reduced agricultural production . In 1997 and 1998 , nominal GDP was approximately a high of about 8 percent of GDP and then lowered to 4 percent of GDP in 1999 and 2000 . The economy in 1997 was marked by low levels of import growth , high levels of private capital inflows and relative stability in the foreign exchange market .
Recent economic performance shows the Jamaican economy is recovering . Agricultural production , an important engine of growth increased to 5.5 % in 2001 compared to the corresponding period in 2000 , signalling the first positive growth rate in the sector since January 1997 . In 2018 , Jamaica reported a 7.9 % increase in maize , 6.1 % increase in cooking banana , 10.4 % increase in bananas , 2.2 % increase in pineapples , 13.3 % increase in colocasia esculenta , 24.9 % increase in coconuts , and a 10.6 % increase in whole milk production . Bauxite and alumina production increased 5.5 % from January to December 1998 , compared to the corresponding period in 1997 . January 's bauxite production recorded a 7.1 % increase relative to January 1998 and continued expansion of alumina production through 2009 is planned by Alcoa . Jamaica is the fifth-largest exporter of bauxite in the world , after Australia , China , Brazil and Guinea . The country also exports limestone , of which it holds large deposits . The government is currently implementing plans to increase its extraction .
A Canadian company , Carube Copper Corp , has found and confirmed , `` ... the existence of at least seven significant Cu/Au porphyry systems ( in St . Catherine ) . '' They have estimated that , `` The porphyry distribution found at Bellas Gate is similar to that found in the Northparkes mining district of New South Wales , Australia ( which was ) sold to China in 2013 for US $ 820 million . '' Carube noted that Jamaica 's geology , `` ... is similar to that of Chile , Argentina and the Dominican Republic  all productive mining jurisdictions . '' Mining on the sites began in 2017.
Tourism , which is the largest foreign exchange earner , showed improvement as well . In 1999 the total visitor arrivals was 2 million , an increase of 100,000 from the previous year . Since 2017 , Jamaica 's tourism has risen exponentially , rising to 4.3 million average tourists per year . Jamaica 's largest tourist markets are from North America , South America , and Europe . In 2017 , Jamaica recorded a 91.3 % increase in stopover visitors from Southern and Western Europe ( and a 41 % increase in stopover arrivals from January to September 2017 over the same period from the previous year ) with Germany , Portugal and Spain registering the highest percentage gains . In 2018 , Jamaica won several World Travel Awards in Portugal winning the `` Chairman 's Award for Global Tourism Innovation '' , `` Best Tourist Board in the Caribbean '' `` Best Honeymoon Destination '' , `` Best Culinary Destination '' , `` World 's Leading Beach Destination '' and `` World 's Leading Cruise Destination '' . Two months later , the Travvy Tourism Awards held in New York City , awarded Jamaica 's Tourism Minister Edmund Bartlett , with the inaugural Chairman 's Award for , `` Global Tourism Innovation for the Development of the Global Tourism Resilience and Crisis Management Centre ( GTRCM ) '' . Bartlett has also won the Pacific Travel Writer 's Association 's award in Germany for the , `` 2018 Best Tourism Minister of the Year '' .
Petrojam , Jamaica 's national and only petroleum refinery , is co-owned by the Government of Venezuela . Petrojam , `` .. operates a 35,000 barrel per day hydro-skimming refinery , to produce Automotive Diesel Oil ; Heavy Fuel Oil ; Kerosene/Jet Fuel , Liquid Petroleum Gas ( LPG ) , Asphalt and Gasoline . '' Customers include the Power industry , Aircraft refuelers , and Local Marketing companies . On 20 February 2019 , the Jamaican Government voted to retake ownership of Venezuela 's 49 % share .
Jamaica 's agricultural exports are sugar , bananas , cocoa bean , coconuts , molasses orange ( fruit ) , lime ( fruit ) , grapefruit , rum , Yam ( vegetable ) , allspice ( of which it is the world 's largest and `` most exceptional quality '' exporter ) , and Blue Mountain Coffee which is considered a world renowned gourmet brand .
Jamaica has a wide variety of industrial and commercial activities . The aviation industry is able to perform most routine aircraft maintenance , except for heavy structural repairs . There is a considerable amount of technical support for transport and agricultural aviation . Jamaica has a considerable amount of industrial engineering , light manufacturing , including metal fabrication , metal roofing , and furniture manufacturing . Food and beverage processing , glassware manufacturing , software and data processing , printing and publishing , insurance underwriting , music and recording , and advanced education activities can be found in the larger urban areas . The Jamaican construction industry is entirely self-sufficient , with professional technical standards and guidance .
Since the first quarter of 2006 , the economy of Jamaica has undergone a period of staunch growth . With inflation for the 2006 calendar year down to 6.0 % and unemployment down to 8.9 % , the nominal GDP grew by an unprecedented 2.9 % . An investment programme in island transportation and utility infrastructure and gains in the tourism , mining , and service sectors all contributed this figure . All projections for 2007 show an even higher potential for economic growth with all estimates over 3.0 % and hampered only by urban crime and public policies .
In 2006 , Jamaica became part of the Caribbean Community Single Market and Economy CARICOM Single Market and Economy ( CSME ) as one of the pioneering members .
The global economic downturn had a significant impact on the Jamaican economy for the years 2007 to 2009 , resulting in negative economic growth . The government implemented a new Debt Management Initiative , the Jamaica Debt Exchange ( JDX ) on 14 January 2010 . The initiative would see holders of Government of Jamaica ( GOJ ) bonds returning the high interest earning instruments for bonds with lower yields and longer maturities . The offer was taken up by over 95 % of local financial institutions and was deemed a success by the government .
Owing to the success of the JDX program , the Bruce Golding-led government was successful in entering into a borrowing arrangement with the IMF on 4 February 2010 for the amount of US $ 1.27b . The loan agreement is for a period of three years .
In April 2014 , the Governments of Jamaica and China signed the preliminary agreements for the first phase of the Jamaican Logistics Hub ( JLH )  the initiative that aims to position Kingston as the fourth node in the global logistics chain , joining Rotterdam , Dubai and Singapore , and serving the Americas . The Project , when completed , is expected to provide many jobs for Jamaicans , Economic Zones for multinational companies and much needed economic growth to alleviate the country 's heavy debt-to-GDP ratio . Strict adherence to the IMF 's refinancing programme and preparations for the JLH has favourably affected Jamaica 's credit rating and outlook from the three biggest rating agencies . In 2018 , both Moody 's and Standard and Poor Credit ratings upgraded Jamaica 's ratings to both `` stable and positive '' respectively .
==Infrastructure==
===Transport===
The transportation infrastructure in Jamaica consists of roadways , railways and Aviation , with roadways forming the backbone of the island 's internal transport system .
====Roadways====
The Jamaican road network consists of almost of roads , of which over is paved . The Government of Jamaica has , since the late 1990s and in cooperation with private investors , embarked on a campaign of infrastructural improvement projects , one of which includes the creation of a system of freeways , the first such access-controlled roadways of their kind on the island , connecting the main population centres of the island . This project has so far seen the completion of of freeway .
====Railways====
Railways in Jamaica no longer enjoy the prominent position they once did , having been largely replaced by roadways as the primary means of transport . Of the of railway found in Jamaica , only remain in operation , currently used to transport bauxite . On 13 April 2011 , a limited passenger service was resumed between May Pen , Spanish Town and Linstead .
====Air transport====
There are three international airports in Jamaica with modern airport terminal , long runways , and the navigational equipment required to accommodate the large jet aircraft used in modern and air travel : Norman Manley International Airport in Kingston , Jamaica ; Ian Fleming International Airport in Boscobel , Jamaica , Saint Mary Parish , Jamaica ; and the island 's largest and busiest airport , Sir Donald Sangster International Airport in the resort city of Montego Bay . Manley and Sangster International airports are home to the country 's national airline , Air Jamaica . In addition there are local commuter airports at Tinson Pen Aerodrome Tinson Pen ( Kingston ) , Port Antonio , and Negril , which cater to internal flights only . Many other small , rural centres are served by private airstrips on sugar estates or bauxite mines .
====Ports , shipping and lighthouses====
Owing to its location in the Caribbean Sea in the sea lane to the Panama Canal and relative proximity to large markets in North America and emerging markets in Latin America , Jamaica receives much traffic of Containerization . The container terminal at the Port of Kingston has undergone large expansion in capacity in recent years to handle growth both already realised as well as that which is projected in coming years . Montego Freeport in Montego Bay also handles a variety of cargo like ( though more limited than ) the Port of Kingston , mainly agricultural products .
There are several other ports positioned around the island , including Port Esquivel in Saint Catherine Parish , Jamaica St. Catherine ( WINDALCO ) , Rocky Point in Clarendon Parish , Jamaica , Port Kaiser in Saint Elizabeth Parish , Jamaica St. Elizabeth , Port Rhoades in Discovery Bay , Reynolds Pier in Ocho Rios , and Boundbrook Port in Port Antonio .
To aid the navigation of shipping , Jamaica operates nine lighthouses . They are maintained by the Port Authority of Jamaica , an agency of the Ministry of Transport and Works .
===Energy===
Jamaica depends on petroleum imports to satisfy its national energy needs . Many test sites have been explored for oil , but no commercially viable quantities have been found . The most convenient sources of imported oil and motor fuels ( diesel , gasoline , and jet fuel ) are from Mexico and Venezuela .
Jamaica 's electrical power is produced by diesel ( Bunker fuel ) generators located in Old Harbour , Jamaica . This facility has been further equipped with liquid natural gas capability and storage . Other smaller power stations ( most owned by the Jamaica Public Service Company , the island 's electricity provider ) support the island 's electrical grid including the Hunts Bay Power Station , the Bogue Power Station Saint James Parish , Jamaica , the Rockfort Power Station Saint Andrew Parish , Jamaica and small hydroelectric plants on the White River , Rio Bueno , Morant River , Black River ( Maggotty ) and Roaring River . A wind farm , owned by the Petroleum Corporation of Jamaica , was established at Wigton , Manchester Parish .
Jamaica has successfully operated a SLOWPOKE reactor SLOWPOKE-2 nuclear reactor of 20 ; kW capacity since the early 1980s , but there are no plans to expand nuclear power at present .
Jamaica imports approximately of oil energy products per day , including asphalt and lubrication products . Just 20 % of imported fuels are used for road transportation , the rest being used by the bauxite industry , electricity generation , and aviation . 30,000 barrels/day of crude imports are processed into various motor fuels and asphalt by the Petrojam Refinery in Kingston .
Jamaica produces enormous quantities of [ ethanol drinking alcohol ] ( at least 5 % water content ) , most of which appears to be consumed as beverages , and none used as motor fuel . Facilities exist to refine hydrous ethanol feedstock into Absolute ethanol ( 0 % water content ) , but as of 2007 , the process appeared to be uneconomic and the production plant was idle . The facility has since been purchased by West Indies Petroleum Ltd. and repurposed for petroleum distillates .
===Communication===
Jamaica has a fully Digital telephony with a mobile penetration of over 95 % .
The country 's two mobile operators  Flow ( brand ) ( formerly LIME , bMobile and Cable and Wireless Jamaica ) and Digicel have spent millions in network upgrades and expansion . The newest operator , Digicel was granted a licence in 2001 to operate mobile services in the newly liberalised telecom market that had once been the sole domain of the incumbent FLOW ( then Cable and Wireless Jamaica ) monopoly . Digicel opted for the more widely used GSM wireless system , while a past operator , Oceanic ( which became Claro Jamaica and later merged with Digicel Jamaica in 2011 ) opted for the CDMA standard . FLOW ( formerly `` LIME ''  pre-Columbus Communications merger ) which had begun with Digital AMPS standard , subsequently upgraded to GSM in 2002 , decommissioned TDMA in 2006 and only utilised that standard until 2009 when LIME launched its 3G network . Both operators currently provide islandwide coverage with HSPA+ ( 3G ) technology . Currently , only Digicel offers LTE to its customers whereas FLOW Jamaica has committed to launching LTE in the cities of Kingston and Montego Bay , places where Digicel 's LTE network is currently only found in , in short order .
A new entrant to the Jamaican communications market , Columbus Communications , laid a new Submarine communications cable connecting Jamaica to the United States . This new cable increases the total number of submarine cables connecting Jamaica to the rest of the world to four . Cable and Wireless Communications ( parent company of LIME ) acquired the company in late 2014 and replaced their brand LIME with FLOW . Flow ( brand ) currently has the most broadband and cable subscribers on the island and also has 1 million mobile subscribers , second to Digicel ( which had , at its peak , over 2 million mobile subscriptions on its network ) .
Digicel entered the broadband market in 2010 by offering WiMAX broadband , capable of up to 6 Mbit/s per subscriber . To further their broadband share post-LIME/FLOW merger in 2014 , the company introduced a new broadband service called Digicel Play , which is Jamaica 's second FTTx offering ( after LIME 's deployment in selected communities in 2011 ) . It is currently only available in the parishes of Kingston , Portmore and St. Andrew . It offers speeds of up to 200 Mbit/s down , 100 Mbit/s up via a pure fibre optic network . Digicel 's competitor , Flow ( brand ) , has a network consisting of ADSL , Coaxial and Fibre to the Home ( inherited from LIME ) and only offers speeds up to 100 Mbit/s . FLOW has committed to expanding its Fibre offering to more areas in order to combat Digicel 's entrance into the market .
It was announced that the Office and Utilities Regulations ( OUR ) , Ministry of Science , Technology , Energy and Mining ( MSTEM ) and the Spectrum Management Authority ( SMA ) have given approval for another mobile operator licence in January 2016 . The identity of this entrant was ascertained on 20 May 2016 , when the Jamaican Government named the new carrier as Symbiote Investments Limited operating under the name Caricel . The company will focus on 4G LTE data offerings and will first go live in the Kingston Metropolitan Area and will expand to the rest of Jamaica thereafter .
==See also==
* Index of Jamaica-related articles
* List of Jamaicans
* Outline of Jamaica
==References==
==Further reading==
* ( pp . ; 4583 )
*
* Ammar , N. `` From Whence they came '' . Jamaica Journal .
* Bahadur , Gaiutra . Coolie Woman : The Odyssey of Indenture . The University of Chicago ( 2014 ) ,
*
*
*
* Hall , D. `` Bounties European Immigration with Special Reference of the German Settlement at Seaford Town , Parts 1 and 2 '' . Jamaica Journal , 8 , ( 4 ) , 4854 and 9 ( 1 ) , 29 .
*
* Jacobs , H. P. ( 2003 ) . Germany in Jamaica . Indian heritage in Jamaica . Jamaica Journal , 10 , ( 2,3,4 ) , 1019 ,
*
*
*
*
*
*
* The Gleaner . Seaford Town Advertising Feature . 14 August 2003 , D7-D8 .
==External links==
; Governmental details
* Government of Jamaica
* Jamaica at the Royal Family website
* Official website of the Jamaica Information Service
* The Cabinet Office of the Government of Jamaica
* Chief of State and Cabinet Members
; General information
* Jamaica . The World Factbook . Central Intelligence Agency .
* Jamaica from UCB Libraries GovPubs
*
* Jamaica from the BBC News
*
*
* National Library of Jamaica materials in the Digital Library of the Caribbean
* JAMAICA VIRTUAL TOUR IN HD  many locations around the island
* Key Development Forecasts for Jamaica from International Futures
Category : Jamaica
Category : Greater Antilles
Category : Countries in the Caribbean
Category : Island countries
Category : English Caribbean
Category : English-speaking countries and territories
Category : Former Spanish colonies
Category : Former British colonies
Category : G15 nations
Category : Member states of the Caribbean Community
Category : Member states of the Commonwealth of Nations
Category : Member states of the United Nations
Category:1510 establishments in the Spanish West Indies
Category:1655 disestablishments in the Spanish West Indies
Category:1655 establishments in the British Empire
Category:1962 disestablishments in the British Empire
Category : States and territories established in 1962
Category : Small Island Developing States
Category:1962 establishments in Jamaica
Category : Countries in North America <article_end> <article_start>  
* Dominicana redirects here . For the airline , see : Dominicana de Aviacion
The Dominican Republic ( ; Repblica Dominicana , ) is a country located on the island of Hispaniola in the Greater Antilles archipelago of the Caribbean region . It occupies the eastern five-eighths of the island , which it shares with Haiti , making Hispaniola one of only two Caribbean islands , along with Saint Martin ( island ) , that are shared by two sovereign states . The Dominican Republic is the second-largest nation in the Antilles by area ( after Cuba ) at , and third-largest by population , with approximately 10.8 million people ( 2020 est . ) , of whom approximately 3.3 million live in the metropolitan area of Santo Domingo , the capital city . The official language of the country is Spanish language .
The native Tano people had inhabited Hispaniola before the arrival of Europeans , dividing it into five chiefdoms . The Tano people had eventually moved north over many years , and lived around the List of Caribbean islands . The Tano natives had constructed an advanced farming and hunting society , and were on their way to being an organized civilization . Christopher Columbus explored and claimed the island for Spain , landing there on his first voyage in 1492 . The Captaincy General of Santo Domingo became the site of the first permanent European colonization of the Americas in the Americas , and the first seat of the Spanish colonial rule in the New World . Meanwhile , France occupied the western third of Hispaniola , naming their colony Saint-Domingue , which became the independent state of Haiti in 1804 after the Haitian Revolution . During the nineteenth century , Dominicans were often at war , fighting the French , Haitians , Spanish , or amongst themselves , resulting in a society heavily influenced by caudillo , who ruled the country as if it were their personal kingdom . After more than three hundred years of Spanish rule , the Dominican people Republic of Spanish Haiti . The leader of the independence movement , Jos Nez de Cceres , intended the Dominican nation to unite with the country of Gran Colombia , but the newly independent Dominicans were Unification of Hispaniola . Independence came 22 years later in 1844 , after victory in the Dominican War of Independence . Over the next 72 years , the Dominican Republic experienced mostly civil war , several failed invasions by its neighbour , Haiti , and Spanish occupation of the Dominican Republic , before permanently ousting the Spanish during the Dominican Restoration War of 18631865 . The United States occupation of the Dominican Republic ( 191624 ) between 1916 and 1924 ; a subsequent calm and prosperous six-year period under Horacio Vsquez followed . From 1930 the dictatorship of Rafael Trujillo ruled until 1961 . A civil war in 1965 , the country 's last , was ended by United States occupation of the Dominican Republic ( 196566 ) U.S. military occupation and was followed by the authoritarian rule of Joaqun Balaguer ( 19661978 and 19861996 ) . Since 1978 , the Dominican Republic has moved toward representative democracy , and has been led by Leonel Fernndez for most of the time after 1996 . Danilo Medina succeeded Fernndez in 2012 , winning 51 % of the electoral vote over his opponent ex-president Hiplito Meja . He was later succeeded by Luis Abinader in the 2020 presidential election .
The Dominican Republic has the Economy of the Dominican Republic in the Caribbean and Central American region and is the List of Latin American and Caribbean countries by GDP ( PPP ) eighth-largest economy in Latin America . Over the last 25 years , the Dominican Republic has had the fastest-growing economy in the Western Hemisphere  with an average List of countries by real GDP growth rate of 5.3 % between 1992 and 2018 . GDP growth in 2014 and 2015 reached 7.3 and 7.0 % , respectively , the highest in the Western Hemisphere . In the first half of 2016 , the Dominican economy grew 7.4 % continuing its trend of rapid economic growth . Recent growth has been driven by construction , manufacturing , tourism , and mining . The country is the site of the second largest gold mine in the world , the Pueblo Viejo mine . Private consumption has been strong , as a result of low inflation ( under 1 % on average in 2015 ) , job creation , and a high level of remittances .
The Dominican Republic is the World Tourism rankings in the Caribbean . The year-round golf courses are major attractions . A geographically diverse nation , the Dominican Republic is home to both the Caribbean 's tallest mountain peak , Pico Duarte , and the Caribbean 's largest lake and point of lowest elevation , Lake Enriquillo . The island has an average temperature of and great climatic and biological diversity . The country is also the site of the first cathedral , castle , monastery , and fortress built in the Americas , located in Santo Domingo 's Ciudad Colonial ( Santo Domingo ) , a World Heritage Site . Music and sport are of great importance in the Dominican Culture of the Dominican Republic , with Merengue music and Bachata ( music ) as the national dance and music , and baseball as the most popular sport .
== Etymology ==
The `` Dominican '' word comes from the Latin Dominicus , meaning Sunday . However , the island has this name by Saint Dominic ( Saint Dominic ) , founder of the Order of the Dominican Order .
The Dominican Order established a house of high studies on the colony of Santo Domingo that is now known as the Universidad Autnoma de Santo Domingo , and dedicated themselves to the protection of the native Tano people , who were subjected to slavery , and to the education of the inhabitants of the island .
For most of its history , up until independence , the colony was known as Santo Domingo  the name of its present capital and patron saint , Saint Dominic  and continued to be commonly known as such in English until the early 20th century . The residents were called `` Dominicans '' ( Dominicanos ) , the adjectival form of `` Domingo '' , and as such , the revolutionaries named their newly independent country the `` Dominican Republic '' ( Repblica Dominicana ) .
In the National Anthem of the Dominican Republic ( himno nacional de la Repblica Dominicana ) , the term `` Dominicans '' does not appear . The author of its lyrics , Emilio Prud'Homme , consistently uses the poetic term `` Quisqueyans '' ( Quisqueyanos ) . The word `` Quisqueya '' derives from the Tano language , and means `` mother of the lands '' ( madre de las tierras ) . It is often used in songs as another name for the country . The name of the country in English is often shortened to `` the D.R . '' ( la R.D . ) , but this is rare in Spanish .
== History ==
=== Pre-European history ===
The Arawakan languages Arawakan-speaking Tano moved into Hispaniola from the north east region of what is now known as South America , displacing earlier inhabitants , c. 650 C.E . They engaged in farming and fishing , and hunting and gathering . The fierce Island Caribs drove the Tano to the northeastern Caribbean , during much of the 15th century . The estimates of Hispaniola 's population in 1492 vary widely , including tens of thousands , one hundred thousand , three hundred thousand , and four hundred thousand to two million . Determining precisely how many people lived on the island in Pre-Columbian era pre-Columbian times is next to impossible , as no accurate records exist . By 1492 , the island was divided into five Tano chiefdoms . The Tano name for the entire island was either Ayiti or Quisqueya .
The Spaniards arrived in 1492 . Initially , after friendly relationships , the Tanos resisted the conquest , led by the female Chief Anacaona of Xaragua and her ex-husband Chief Caonabo of Maguana , as well as Chiefs Guacanagarx , Guam , Hatuey , and Enriquillo . The latter 's successes gained his people an autonomous enclave for a time on the island . Within a few years after 1492 , the population of Tanos had declined drastically , due to smallpox , measles , and other diseases that arrived with the Europeans .
The first recorded smallpox outbreak , in the Americas , occurred on Hispaniola in 1507 . The last record of pure Tanos in the country was from 1864 . Still , Tano biological heritage survived to an important extent , due to intermixing . Census records from 1514 reveal that 40 % of Spanish men in Santo Domingo were married to Tano women , and some present-day Dominicans have Tano ancestry . Remnants of the Tano culture include their cave paintings , such as the Pomier Caves , as well as pottery designs , which are still used in the small artisan village of Higerito , Moca , Dominican Republic .
=== European colonization ===
Christopher Columbus arrived on the island on December 5 , 1492 , during the first of his Voyages of Christopher Columbus to the Americas . He claimed the land for Spain and named it La Espaola , due to its diverse climate and terrain , which reminded him of the Spain . Traveling further east , Columbus came across the Yaque del Norte River , in the Cibao region , which he named Rio de Oro after discovering gold deposits nearby . On Columbus 's return during his second voyage , he established the settlement of La Isabela in what is now Puerto Plata province in January 1494 , while he sent Alonso de Ojeda to search for gold in the region .
In 1496 , Bartholomew Columbus , Christopher 's brother , built the city of Santo Domingo , Western Europe 's first permanent settlement in the `` New World '' . The colony thus became the springboard for the further Spanish colonization of the Americas , and for decades , the captaincy general of santo domingo of Spanish colonial power in the hemisphere . Soon after , the largest discovery of gold in the island was made in the Cordillera Central , Dominican Republic region , which led to a mining boom . By 1501 , Columbus 's cousin Giovanni Columbus had also discovered gold near Buenaventura ; the deposits were later known as Minas Nuevas . Two major mining areas resulted , one along San Cristbal , Dominican Republic-Buenaventura and another in Cibao within the La Vega , Dominican Republic-Cotuy-Bonao triangle , while Santiago de los Caballeros , La Vega , Dominican Republic , and Bonao became mining towns . The gold rush of 15001508 ensued . Ferdinand II of Aragon `` ordered gold from the richest mines reserved for the Crown . '' Thus , Ovando expropriated the gold mines of Miguel Diaz and Francisco de Garay in 1504 , as pit mines became royal mines , though placer mining were open to private prospectors . Furthermore , Ferdinand wanted the `` best Indians '' working his royal mines , and kept 967 in the San Cristbal mining area , supervised by salaried miners .
Under Nicols de Ovando y Cceres ' governorship , the Indians were made to work in the gold mines , `` where they were grossly overworked , mistreated , and underfed , '' according to Pons . By 1503 , the Spanish Crown legalized the distribution of Indians to work the mines , as part of the encomienda system . According to Pons , `` Once the Indians entered the mines , hunger and disease literally wiped them out . '' By 1508 , the Indian population of about 400,000 was reduced to 60,000 , and by 1514 , only 26,334 remained . About half were located in the mining towns of Concepcin , Santiago , Santo Domingo , and Buenaventura . The repartimiento of 1514 accelerated emigration of the Spanish colonists , coupled with the exhaustion of the mines . In 1516 , a smallpox epidemic killed an additional 8,000 of the remaining 11,000 Indians , in one month . By 1519 , according to Pons , `` Both the gold economy and the Indian population became extinct at the same time . ''
In 1501 , the Catholic Monarchs first granted permission to the colonists of the Caribbean to import African slaves , who began arriving to the island in 1503 . Sugar cane was introduced to Hispaniola from the Canary Islands , and the first sugar mill in the New World was established in 1516 , on Hispaniola . The need for a labor force to meet the growing demands of sugar cane cultivation led to an exponential increase in the importation of slaves , over the following two decades . The sugar mill owners soon formed a new colonial elite and convinced the Spanish king to allow them to elect the members of the Real Audiencia from their ranks . Poorer colonists subsisted by hunting the herds of wild cattle that roamed throughout the island and selling their leather .
With the conquest of the American mainland , Hispaniola 's sugar plantation economy quickly declined . Most Spanish colonists left for the silver-mines of Mexico and Peru , while new immigrants from Spain bypassed the island . Agriculture dwindled , new imports of slaves ceased , and white colonists , free blacks , and slaves alike lived in poverty , weakening the racial hierarchy and aiding intermixing , resulting in a population of predominantly mixed Spaniard , Tano , and African descent . Except for the city of Santo Domingo , which managed to maintain some legal exports , Dominican ports were forced to rely on contraband trade , which , along with livestock , became one of the main sources of livelihood for the island 's inhabitants .
In the mid-17th century , Kingdom of France sent colonists and privateers to settle the northwestern coast of Hispaniola due to its strategic position in the region . In order to entice the pirates , France supplied them with women who had been taken from prisons , accused of prostitution and thieving . After decades of armed struggles with the French settlers , Spain ceded the western coast of the island to France with the 1697 Treaty of Ryswick , whilst the Central Plateau remained under Spanish domain . France created a wealthy colony on the island , while the Spanish colony continued to suffer economic decline .
On April 17 , 1655 , English forces landed on Hispaniola and marched 30 miles overland to Santo Domingo , the main Spanish stronghold on the island . Mounted lancers attacked the invaders , sending them careening back toward the beach in utter confusion . Their commander hid behind a tree where , in the words of one disgusted observer , he was `` so much possessed with terror that he could hardly speak . '' The elite Siege of Santo Domingo ( 1655 ) were amply rewarded with titles from the Spanish Crown . French forces attacked Santiago in 1667 , and this was followed by a devastating hurricane the next year and a smallpox epidemic that killed about 1,500 in 1669 . In 1687 , the Spaniards captured the fort at Petit-Goave , but the French fought back and hanged their leaders . Two years later , in the Nine Years ' War , the French sacked Santiago . In 1691 , the Spaniards Battle of Sabana Real and sacked Cap-Franois . Island tensions subsided once peace was restored , and Spain 's last Habsburg monarch  the deformed invalid Charles II of Spain  died on November 1 , 1700 , being succeeded by the sixteen-year-old French Bourbon princeling Philip of Anjou .
=== 18th century ===
The House of Bourbon replaced the House of Habsburg in Spain in 1700 , and introduced economic reforms that gradually began to revive trade in Santo Domingo . The crown progressively relaxed the rigid controls and restrictions on commerce between Spain and the colonies and among the colonies . The last flotas sailed in 1737 ; the monopoly port system was abolished shortly thereafter . By the middle of the century , the population was bolstered by the emigration of Spaniards from the Canary Islands , resettling the northern part of the colony and planting tobacco in the Cibao Valley , and importation of slaves was renewed . The colony of Santo Domingo saw a population increase during the 18th century , as it rose to about 91,272 in 1750 . Of this number , approximately 38,272 were white landowners , 38,000 were free mixed people of color , and some 15,000 were slaves . This contrasted sharply with the population of the French colony of Saint-Domingue ( present-day Haiti ) ;  the wealthiest colony in the Caribbean and whose population of one-half a million was 90 % enslaved and overall , seven times as numerous as the Spanish colony of Santo Domingo . The 'Spanish ' settlers , whose blood by now was mixed with that of Tanos , Africans , and Canary Guanches , proclaimed : 'It does not matter if the French are richer than us , we are still the true inheritors of this island . In our veins runs the blood of the heroic conquistadores who won this island of ours with sword and blood . '
When the War of Jenkins ' Ear between Spain and Britain broke out in 1739 , Spanish privateers , particularly from Santo Domingo , began to patrol the Caribbean Sea , a development that lasted until the end of the eighteenth century . During this period , Spanish privateers from Santo Domingo sailed into enemy ports looking for ships to plunder , thus disrupting commerce between Britain and New York . As a result , the Spanish obtained stolen merchandisefoodstuffs , ships , enslaved personsthat were sold in Hispaniola 's ports , with profits accruing to individual sea raiders . The revenue acquired in these acts of piracy was invested in the economic expansion of the colony and led to repopulation from Europe .
Between 1720 and 1774 , Dominican privateers captured merchant and warships in the waters around Santo Domingo and Captaincy General of Puerto Rico . They were responsible for bringing hundreds of African slaves to the island . The most common type of ship used by the privateers was a sloop .
As restrictions on colonial trade were relaxed , the colonial elites of St. Domingue offered the principal market for Santo Domingo 's exports of beef , hides , mahogany , and tobacco . With the outbreak of the Haitian Revolution in 1791 , the rich urban families linked to the colonial bureaucracy fled the island , while most of the rural hateros ( cattle ranchers ) remained , even though they lost their principal market . Although the population of Spanish Santo Domingo was perhaps one-fourth that of French Saint-Domingue , this did not prevent the Spanish king from launching an invasion of the French side of the island in 1793 , attempting to take advantage of the chaos sparked by the French Revolution . French forces checked Spanish progress toward Port-au-Prince in the south , but the Spanish pushed rapidly through the north , most of which they occupied by 1794 . Although the Spanish military effort went well on Hispaniola , it did not in Europe ( see War of the Pyrenees ) . As a consequence , Spain was forced to cede Santo Domingo to the French under the terms of the Peace of Basel ( July 22 , 1795 ) in order to get the French to withdraw from Spain .
=== French rule ===
From 1795 to 1822 , Santo Domingo ( the city ) changed hands several times along with the colony it headed . It was ceded to France in 1795 after years of struggles . However , the French failed to consolidate this cession , mainly because of the continued presence of British troops in Saint-Domingue ( they remained there until 1798 ) . As the news of Santo Domingo 's cession became known on the island , many Dominicans had sided with Britain against France , welcoming British ships into their ports , pledging allegiance to the British and enlisting in the military forces of France 's longtime opponent .
In 1801 , Toussaint Louverture , who at least in theory represented imperial France , marched into Santo Domingo from Saint-Domingue to enforce the terms of the Peace of Basel . Toussaint 's army committed numerous atrocities ; as a consequence , the Spanish population fled from Santo Domingo in exodus proportions . French control of the former Spanish colony passed from Toussaint Louverture to Gen. Charles Leclerc ( general , born 1772 ) when he seized the city of Santo Domingo in early 1802 . Following the defeat of the French under Gen. Donatien de Rochembeau at Le Cap in November 1803 by the Haitians , their new leader , Jean-Jacques Dessalines , attempted to drive the French out of Santo Domingo . He invaded the Spanish side of the island , defeated the French-led Spanish colonials at River Yaque del Sur , and besieged the capital on March 5 , 1805 . At the same time , the Haitian General Henri Christophe marched north through Cibao , capturing Santiago where he massacred prominent individuals who had sought refuge in a church . The arrival of small French squadrons off the Haitian coast at Goncaives and at Santo Domingo forced the Haitians to withdraw . As Christophe retreated across the island , he slaughtered and burned . In October 1808 the landowner Juan Snchez Ramrez began a rebellion against the French colonial government in Santo Domingo and the insurgents were aided by History of Puerto Rico # Spanish rule ( 14931898 ) and Colony of Jamaica . A combined Anglo-Spanish force recaptured the territory in 1809 . The Spaniards , upon re-establishing control , not only tried to re-establish slavery in Santo Domingo , but many of them also mounted raiding expeditions into Haiti to capture blacks and enslave them as well .
=== Independence from Spain ( 1821 ) ===
After a dozen years of discontent and failed independence plots by various opposing groups , Santo Domingo 's former Lieutenant-Governor ( top administrator ) , Jos Nez de Cceres , declared the colony 's independence from the Spanish Empire as Republic of Spanish Haiti , on November 30 , 1821 . This period is also known as the Ephemeral independence .
=== Unification of Hispaniola ( 182244 ) ===
The newly independent republic ended two months later under the Haitian government led by Jean-Pierre Boyer .
As Toussaint Louverture had done two decades earlier , the Haitians abolished slavery . In order to raise funds for the huge indemnity of 150 million francs that Haiti agreed to pay the former French colonists , and which was subsequently lowered to 60 million francs , the Haitian government imposed heavy taxes on the Dominicans . Since Haiti was unable to adequately provision its army , the occupying forces largely survived by commandeering or confiscating food and supplies at gunpoint . Attempts to Land reform land conflicted with the system of communal land tenure ( terrenos comuneros ) , which had arisen with the ranching economy , and some people resented being forced to grow cash crops under Boyer and Joseph Balthazar Inginac 's Code Rural . In the rural and rugged mountainous areas , the Haitian administration was usually too inefficient to enforce its own laws . It was in the city of Santo Domingo that the effects of the occupation were most acutely felt , and it was there that the movement for independence originated .
The Haitians associated the Roman Catholic Church with the French slave-masters who had exploited them before independence and confiscated all church property , deported all foreign clergy , and severed the ties of the remaining clergy to the Holy See . All levels of education collapsed ; the university was shut down , as it was starved both of resources and students , with young Dominican men from 16 to 25 years old being drafted into the Haitian army . Boyer 's occupation troops , who were largely Dominicans , were unpaid and had to `` forage and sack '' from Dominican civilians . Haiti imposed a `` heavy tribute '' on the Dominican people .
Haiti 's constitution forbade white elites from owning land , and Dominican major landowning families were forcibly deprived of their properties . During this time , many white elites in Santo Domingo did not consider owning slaves due to the economic crisis that Santo Domingo faced during the Espaa Boba period . The few landowners that wanted slavery established in Santo Domingo had to emigrate to other colonies such as Cuba , Puerto Rico , or Gran Colombia . Many landowning families stayed on the island , with a heavy concentration of landowners settling in the cibao region . After independence , and eventually being under Spanish occupation of the Dominican Republic once again in 1861 , many families returned to Santo Domingo including new waves of immigration from Spain .
=== Dominican War of Independence ( 184456 ) ===
In 1838 , Juan Pablo Duarte founded a secret society called La Trinitaria ( Dominican Republic ) , which sought the complete independence of Santo Domingo without any foreign intervention . Also Francisco del Rosario Snchez and Ramon Matias Mella , despite not being among the founding members of La Trinitaria , were decisive in the fight for independence . Duarte , Mella , and Snchez are considered the three Founding Fathers of the Dominican Republic .
The Trinitarios took advantage of a Haitian rebellion against the dictator Jean-Pierre Boyer . They rose up on January 27 , 1843 , ostensibly in support of the Haitian Charles Rivire-Hrard who was challenging Boyer for the control of Haiti . However , the movement soon discarded its pretext of support for Hrard and now championed Dominican independence . After overthrowing Boyer , Hrard executed some Dominicans , and threw many others into prison ; Duarte escaped . After subduing the Dominicans , Hrard , a mulatto , faced a rebellion by blacks in Port-au-Prince . Haiti had formed two regiments composed of Dominicans from the city of Santo Domingo ; these were used by Hrard to suppress the uprising .
In 1844 , the surviving members of La Trinitaria , now led by Toms Bobadilla , chose Puerta del Conde , the prominent `` Gate of the Count '' in the old city walls , as the rallying point for their insurrection against the Haitian government . On the morning of February 27 , 1844 , El Conde rang with the shots of the plotters , who had emerged from their secret meetings to openly challenge the Haitians . Their efforts were successful , and for the next ten years , Dominican military strongmen fought to preserve their country 's independence from their Haitian neighbors .
The Trinitarios were backed by Pedro Santana , a wealthy cattle rancher from El Seibo , who became general of the army of the nascent republic . The Dominican Republic 's first Constitution of the Dominican Republic was adopted on November 6 , 1844 , and was modeled after the United States Constitution . The decades that followed were filled with tyranny , factionalism , economic difficulties , rapid changes of government , and exile for political opponents . Archrivals Santana and Buenaventura Bez held power most of the time , both ruling arbitrarily . They promoted competing plans to annex the new nation to another power : Santana favored Spain , and Bez the United States .
Threatening the nation 's independence were renewed Haitian invasions . On March 19 , 1844 , the Haitian army , under the personal command of President Hrard , invaded the eastern province from the north and progressed as far as Santiago , but was soon forced to withdraw after suffering disproportionate losses . According to Jos Mara Imbert 's ( the General defending Santiago ) report of April 5 , 1844 to Santo Domingo , `` in Santiago , the enemy did not leave behind in the battlefield less than six hundred dead and ... the number of wounded was very superior ... [ while on ] our part we suffered not one casualty . ''
The Dominicans repelled the Haitian forces , on both land and sea , by December 1845 . The Haitians invaded again in 1849 after France recognized the Dominican Republic as an independent nation . Santana being called upon to assume command of the troops , met the enemy at Ocoa , April 21 , 1849 , with only 400 men , and succeeded in utterly defeating the Haitian army . In November 1849 , Bez launched a naval offensive against Haiti to forestall the threat of another invasion . His seamen under the French adventurer , Fagalde , raided the Haitian coasts , plundered seaside villages , as far as Cape Dame Marie , and butchered crews of captured enemy ships . In 1855 , Haiti invaded again , but its forces were repulsed at the Battle of Santom in December 1855 and the Battle of Sabana Larga in January 1856.
=== First Republic ===
The Dominican Republic 's first Constitution of the Dominican Republic was adopted on November 6 , 1844 . The state was commonly known as Santo Domingo in English until the early 20th century . It featured a presidential form of government with many liberal tendencies , but it was marred by Article 210 , imposed by Pedro Santana on the constitutional assembly by force , giving him the privileges of a dictatorship until the war of independence was over . These privileges not only served him to win the war but also allowed him to persecute , execute and drive into exile his political opponents , among which Duarte was the most important . In Haiti after the fall of Boyer , black leaders had ascended to the power once enjoyed exclusively by the mulatto elite .
Due to the rugged mountainous terrain of the island the regions of the Dominican Republic developed in isolation from one another . In the south , also known at the time as Ozama , the economy was dominated by cattle-ranching ( particularly in the southeastern savannah ) and cutting mahogany and other hardwoods for export . This region retained a semi-feudal character , with little commercial agriculture , the hacienda as the dominant social unit , and the majority of the population living at a subsistence level . In the north ( better-known as Cibao ) , the nation 's richest farmland , farmers supplemented their subsistence crops by growing tobacco for export , mainly to Germany . Tobacco required less land than cattle ranching and was mainly grown by smallholders , who relied on itinerant traders to transport their crops to Puerto Plata and Monte Cristi . Santana antagonized the Cibao farmers , enriching himself and his supporters at their expense by resorting to multiple peso printings that allowed him to buy their crops for a fraction of their value . In 1848 , he was forced to resign and was succeeded by his vice-president , Manuel Jimenes .
After defeating a new Haitian invasion in 1849 , Santana marched on Santo Domingo and deposed Jimenes in a coup d'tat . At his behest , Congress elected Buenaventura Bez as President , but Bez was unwilling to serve as Santana 's puppet , challenging his role as the country 's acknowledged military leader . In 1853 , Santana was elected president for his second term , forcing Bez into exile . Three years later , after repulsing another Haitian invasion , he negotiated a treaty leasing a portion of Saman Peninsula to a U.S. company ; popular opposition forced him to abdicate , enabling Bez to return and seize power . With the treasury depleted , Bez printed eighteen million uninsured pesos , purchasing the 1857 tobacco crop with this currency and exporting it for [ cash ] at immense profit to himself and his followers . Cibao tobacco planters , who were ruined when hyperinflation ensued , revolted and formed a new government headed by Jos Desiderio Valverde and headquartered in Santiago de los Caballeros . In July 1857 General Juan Luis Franco Bid besieged Santo Domingo . The Cibao-based government declared an amnesty to exiles and Santana returned and managed to replace Franco Bid in September 1857 . After a year of civil war , Santana captured Santo Domingo in June 1858 , overthrew both Bez and Valverde and installed himself as president .
=== Restoration republic ===
In 1861 , after imprisoning , silencing , exiling , and executing many of his opponents and due to political and economic reasons , Santana signed a pact with the Spanish Crown and reverted the Dominican nation to Spanish occupation of the Dominican Republic . This action was supported by the cattlemen of the south while the northern elites opposed it . Spanish rule finally came to an end with the Dominican Restoration War in 1865 , after four years of conflict between Dominican nationalists and Spanish sympathizers . The war claimed more than 50,000 lives .
Political strife again prevailed in the following years ; warlords ruled , military revolts were extremely common , and the nation amassed debt . In 1869 , President Ulysses S. Grant ordered U.S. Marines to the island for the first time . Pirates operating from Haiti had been raiding U.S. commercial shipping in the Caribbean , and Grant directed the Marines to stop them at their source . Following the virtual takeover of the island , Bez offered to Annexation of Santo Domingo . Grant desired a naval base at Saman Bay and also a place for resettling newly freed African American . The treaty , which included U.S. payment of $ 1.5 million for Dominican debt repayment , was defeated in the United States Senate in 1870 on a vote of 2828 , two-thirds being required .
Bez was toppled in 1874 , returned , and was toppled for good in 1878 . A new generation was thence in charge , with the passing of Santana ( he died in 1864 ) and Bez from the scene . Relative peace came to the country in the 1880s , which saw the coming to power of General Ulises Heureaux .
`` Lils '' , as the new president was nicknamed , enjoyed a period of popularity . He was , however , `` a consummate dissembler '' , who put the nation deep into debt while using much of the proceeds for his personal use and to maintain his police state . Heureaux became rampantly despotic and unpopular . In 1899 , he was assassinated . However , the relative calm over which he presided allowed improvement in the Dominican economy . The sugar industry was modernized , and the country attracted foreign workers and immigrants .
=== 20th century ( 190030 ) ===
From 1902 on , short-lived governments were again the norm , with their power usurped by caudillos in parts of the country . Furthermore , the national government was bankrupt and , unable to pay Heureaux 's debts , faced the threat of military intervention by France and other European creditor powers .
United States President Theodore Roosevelt sought to prevent European intervention , largely to protect the routes to the future Panama Canal , as the canal was already under construction . He made a small 1916 United States occupation of the Dominican Republic to ward off European powers , to proclaim his famous Roosevelt Corollary to the Monroe Doctrine , and also to obtain his 1905 Dominican agreement for U.S. administration of Dominican customs , which was the chief source of income for the Dominican government . A 1906 agreement provided for the arrangement to last 50 years . The United States agreed to use part of the customs proceeds to reduce the immense foreign debt of the Dominican Republic and assumed responsibility for said debt .
After six years in power , President Ramn Cceres ( who had himself assassinated Heureaux ) was assassinated in 1911 . The result was several years of great political instability and civil war . U.S. mediation by the William Howard Taft and Woodrow Wilson administrations achieved only a short respite each time . A political deadlock in 1914 was broken after an ultimatum by Wilson telling the Dominicans to choose a president or see the U.S. impose one . A provisional president was chosen , and later the same year relatively free elections put former president ( 18991902 ) Juan Isidro Jimenes Pereyra back in power . To achieve a more broadly supported government , Jimenes named opposition individuals to his cabinet . But this brought no peace and , with his former Secretary of War Desiderio Arias maneuvering to depose him and despite a U.S. offer of military aid against Arias , Jimenes resigned on May 7 , 1916.
Wilson thus ordered the U.S. occupation of the Dominican Republic . United States Marine Corps U.S. Marines landed on May 16 , 1916 , and had control of the country two months later . The military government established by the U.S. , led by Vice Admiral Harry Shepard Knapp , was widely repudiated by the Dominicans , with many factions within the country leading guerrilla campaigns against U.S. forces . The occupation regime kept most Dominican laws and institutions and largely pacified the general population . The occupying government also revived the Dominican economy , reduced the nation 's debt , built a road network that at last interconnected all regions of the country , and created a professional National Guard to replace the warring partisan units .
Vigorous opposition to the occupation continued , nevertheless , and after World War I it increased in the U.S. as well . There , President Warren G. Harding ( 192123 ) , Wilson 's successor , worked to put an end to the occupation , as he had promised to do during his campaign . The U.S. government 's rule ended in October 1922 , and elections were held in March 1924.
The victor was former president ( 190203 ) Horacio Vsquez , who had cooperated with the U.S . He was inaugurated on July 13 , 1924 and the last U.S. forces left in September . In six years , the Marines were involved in at least 467 engagements , with 950 insurgents killed or wounded in action . Vsquez gave the country six years of stable governance , in which political and civil rights were respected and the economy grew strongly , in a relatively peaceful atmosphere .
During the government of Horacio Vsquez , Rafael Trujillo held the rank of lieutenant colonel and was chief of police . This position helped him launch his plans to overthrow the government of Vsquez . Trujillo had the support of Carlos Rosario Pea , who formed the Civic Movement , which had as its main objective to overthrow the government of Vsquez .
In February 1930 , when Vsquez attempted to win another term , his opponents rebelled in secret alliance with the commander of the National Army ( the former National Guard ) , General Rafael Trujillo . Trujillo secretly cut a deal with rebel leader Rafael Estrella Urea ; in return for letting Urea take power , Trujillo would be allowed to run for president in new elections . As the rebels marched toward Santo Domingo , Vsquez ordered Trujillo to suppress them . However , feigning `` neutrality , '' Trujillo kept his men in barracks , allowing Urea 's rebels to take the capital virtually uncontested . On March 3 , Urea was proclaimed acting president with Trujillo confirmed as head of the police and the army .
As per their agreement , Trujillo became the presidential nominee of the newly formed Patriotic Coalition of Citizens ( Spanish : Coalicin patriotica de los ciudadanos ) , with Urea as his running mate . During the election campaign , Trujillo used the army to unleash his repression , forcing his opponents to withdraw from the race . Trujillo stood to elect himself , and in May he was elected president virtually unopposed after a violent campaign against his opponents , ascending to power on August 16 , 1930.
=== Trujillo Era ( 193061 ) ===
There was considerable economic growth during Rafael Trujillo 's long and iron-fisted regime , although a great deal of the wealth was taken by the dictator and other regime elements . There was progress in healthcare , education , and transportation , with the building of hospitals and clinics , schools , and roads and harbors . Trujillo also carried out an important housing construction program and instituted a pension plan . He finally negotiated an undisputed border with Haiti in 1935 and achieved the end of the 50-year customs agreement in 1941 , instead of 1956 . He made the country debt-free in 1947 . This was accompanied by absolute repression and the copious use of murder , torture , and terrorist methods against the opposition . Trujillo 's henchmen did not hesitate to use intimidation , torture , or assassination of political foes both at home and abroad . Trujillo was responsible for the deaths of the Spaniards Jos Almoina in Mexico City and Jess Galndez in New York City .
In 1930 , 1930 Dominican Republic hurricane destroyed Santo Domingo and killed 8,000 people . During the rebuilding process , Trujillo renamed Santo Domingo to `` Ciudad Trujillo '' ( Trujillo City ) , and the nation 's ;  and the Caribbean 's ;  highest mountain Pico Duarte ( Spanish for : The Great Bald ) to `` Pico Trujillo '' ( Spanish for : Trujillo Peak ) . By the end of his first term in 1934 he was the country 's wealthiest person , and one of the wealthiest in the world by the early 1950s ; near the end of his regime his fortune was an estimated $ 800 million ( $ 5.3 billion today ) .
Although one-quarter Haitian , Trujillo promoted propaganda against Haitian people . In 1937 , he ordered what became known as the Parsley Massacre or , in the Dominican Republic , as El Corte ( The Cutting ) , directing the army to kill Haitians living on the Dominican side of the border . The army killed an estimated 17,000 to 35,000 Haitian men , women , and children over six days , from the night of October 2 , 1937 , through October 8 , 1937 . To avoid leaving evidence of the army 's involvement , the soldiers used Edged and bladed weapons rather than guns . The soldiers were said to have interrogated anyone with dark skin , using the shibboleth perejil ( parsley ) to distinguish Haitians from Afro-Dominican ( Dominican Republic ) Afro-Dominicans when necessary ; the ' r ' of perejil was of difficult pronunciation for Haitians . As a result of the massacre , the Dominican Republic agreed to pay Haiti US $ 750,000 , later reduced to US $ 525,000 . In 1938 , reports from the Dominican Republic revealed hundreds more Haitians had been killed and thousands deported .
Trujillo 's dictatorship was marred by botched invasions , international scandals and assassination attempts . 1947 brought the failure of a planned invasion by leftist Dominican exiles from the Cuban island of Cayo Confites . July 1949 was the year of a failed invasion from Guatemala , and on June 14 , 1959 , there was a failed invasion at Constanza , Dominican Republic , Maimn and Estero Hondo by Dominican rebels from Cuba .
On November 25 , 1960 , Trujillo killed three of the four Mirabal sisters , nicknamed Las Mariposas ( The Butterflies ) . The victims were Patria Mercedes Mirabal ( born on February 27 , 1924 ) , Argentina Minerva Mirabal ( born on March 12 , 1926 ) , and Antonia Mara Teresa Mirabal ( born on October 15 , 1935 ) . Along with their husbands , the sisters were conspiring to overthrow Trujillo in a violent revolt . The Mirabals had communist ideological leanings , as did their husbands . The sisters have received many honors posthumously and have many memorials in various cities in the Dominican Republic . Salcedo , their home province , changed its name to Hermanas Mirabal Province ( Mirabal Sisters Province ) . The International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women is observed on the anniversary of their deaths .
For a long time , the U.S. and the Dominican elite supported the Trujillo government . This support persisted despite the assassinations of political opposition , the massacre of Haitians , and Trujillo 's plots against other countries . The U.S. believed Trujillo was the lesser of two or more evils . The U.S. finally broke with Trujillo in 1960 , after Trujillo 's agents attempted to assassinate the Venezuelan president , Rmulo Betancourt , a fierce critic of Trujillo .
Trujillo had become expendable . Dissidents inside the Dominican Republic argued that assassination was the only certain way to remove Trujillo .
According to Chester Bowles , the U.S . Undersecretary of State , internal Department of State discussions in 1961 on the topic were vigorous . Richard N. Goodwin , Assistant Special Counsel to the President , who had direct contacts with the rebel alliance , argued for intervention against Trujillo . Quoting Bowles directly : The next morning I learned that in spite of the clear decision against having the dissident group request our assistance Dick Goodwin following the meeting sent a cable to CIA people in the Dominican Republic without checking with State or CIA ; indeed , with the protest of the Department of State . The cable directed the CIA people in the Dominican Republic to get this request at any cost . When Allen Dulles found this out the next morning , he withdrew the order . We later discovered it had already been carried out .
=== Post-Trujillo ( 19621996 ) ===
Trujillo was assassinated on May 30 , 1961 with weapons supplied by the United States Central Intelligence Agency ( CIA ) .
In February 1963 , a democratically elected government under leftist Juan Bosch ( politician ) took office but it was overthrown in September . On April 24 , 1965 , after 19 months of military rule , a pro-Bosch revolt broke out .
Days later U.S. President Lyndon Johnson , concerned that communists might take over the revolt and create a `` second Cuba , '' sent the Marines , followed immediately by the U.S. Army 's 82nd Airborne Division and other elements of the XVIIIth Airborne Corps , in Operation Powerpack . `` We do n't propose to sit here in a rocking chair with our hands folded and let the Communist set up any government in the Western Hemisphere , '' Johnson said . The forces were soon joined by comparatively small contingents from the Organization of American States . All these remained in the country for over a year and left after supervising elections in 1966 won by Joaqun Balaguer . He had been Trujillo 's last puppet-president .
The Dominican death toll for the entire period of civil war and occupation totaled more than 3,000 , many of them black civilians killed when the US-backed military junta engaged in a campaign of ethnic cleansing in the northern ( also the industrial ) part of Santo Domingo .
Balaguer remained in power as president for 12 years . His tenure was a period of repression of human rights and civil liberties , ostensibly to keep pro-Castro or pro-communist parties out of power ; 11,000 persons were killed . His rule was criticized for a growing disparity between rich and poor . It was , however , praised for an ambitious infrastructure program , which included the construction of large housing projects , sports complexes , theaters , museums , aqueducts , roads , highways , and the massive Columbus Lighthouse , completed in 1992 during a later tenure . During Balaguer 's administration , the Dominican military forced Haitians to cut sugarcane on Dominican sugar plantations ( Batey ( sugar workers ' town ) ) .
Hurricane David hit the Dominican Republic in August 1979 and killed more than 2,000 people .
In 1978 , Balaguer was succeeded in the presidency by opposition candidate Antonio Guzmn Fernndez , of the Dominican Revolutionary Party ( PRD ) . Another PRD win in 1982 followed , under Salvador Jorge Blanco . Balaguer regained the presidency in 1986 and was re-elected in 1990 and 1994 , this last time just defeating PRD candidate Jos Francisco Pea Gmez , a former mayor of Santo Domingo .
During this period , the international community condemned the Dominican government for their continued exploitation of Haitian sugar cane workers ; it had been alleged that 50,000 of these workers had essentially been put into slavery , forced to do backbreaking work under the supervision of armed guards .
The 1994 elections were flawed , bringing on international pressure , to which Balaguer responded by scheduling another presidential contest in 1996 . Balaguer was not a candidate . The PSRC candidate was his Vice President Jacinto Peynado Garrigosa .
=== 1996present ===
In the 1996 , with the support of Joaqun Balaguer and the Social Christian Reform Party in a coalition called the Patriotic Front , Leonel Fernndez achieved the first-ever win for the Dominican Liberation Party ( PLD ) , which Bosch had founded in 1973 after leaving the PRD ( which he also had founded ) . Fernndez oversaw a fast-growing economy : growth averaged 7.7 % per year , unemployment fell , and there were stable exchange and inflation rates .
His administration supported the process of modernizing the judicial system , making transparent the creation of an independent Supreme Court of Justice . Efforts were also made to reform and modernize the other state bodies . In addition , relations with Cuba were reestablished and the Free Trade Agreement with Central America was signed , which was the genesis for the signing of DR-CAFTA .
In 2000 , the PRD 's Hiplito Meja won the election . This was a time of economic troubles . Neverthelss , his government was marked by major economic and social reforms , apart from a decentralization of the national budget . Among the laws created in this period are the Social Security , the Monetary and Financial Code , the Stock Market , Electricity , Electronic Commerce , the Police Law , the Environment , Public Health , the Chamber of Accounts , the Insurance Law , Administrative Independence and Budgetary of the Legislative Power and Judicial Power ; in addition , creation of the Santo Domingo Province and its municipalities , a larger budget for municipalities , as well as other laws . This meant in the 2002 elections , obtaining a congressional and municipal majority . During this period , great sports structures were built for the 2003 Pan American Games . Under Meja , the Dominican Republic participated in the US-led coalition , as part of the Multinational Brigade Plus Ultra , during the 2003 invasion of Iraq , suffering no casualties . In 2004 , the country withdrew its approximately 300 soldiers from Iraq . The government of President Meja had to negotiate the Free Trade Agreement with the United States , the main trading partner . He also promoted various commercial measures , popularly called `` Economic Package '' . This `` package '' was accompanied by a series of social measures , such as aid to agricultural producers , subsidies to electricity rates , construction of streets , sidewalks , local roads , etc. , as well as subsidies to poor families whose children attended schools , as well as the creation of new taxes and increases in existing ones .
In 2003 the effects of the bankruptcy of three banking entities whose savers were protected by the government who financed this situation by creating inflation . This caused a strong economic crisis accompanied by the devaluation of the currency and capital outflows , instability that led to the bankruptcy of many companies . With the congressional majority obtained in 2002 , President Meja promoted a constitutional reform that restored the possibility of presidential reelection , which had been abolished in 1994 at the request of his own party . This reform caused problems within his party causing a division within its main leaders .
Meja was defeated in his re-election effort in 2004 by Leonel Fernndez of the PLD who won with 57.11 % of the votes the presidential elections . At the beginning of his second presidential term , he made an effort to combat the economic crisis , reestablishing macroeconomic stability , manifesting among other things through the reduction of the dollar exchange rate and the return of confidence in the economy . On the other hand , his administrations was accused of corruption . President Fernndez 's management consisted of improving Santo Domingo 's collective transport system , the first Metro line was built ; the completion of the main communication routes to the country 's tourist poles ; the construction of new schools or the construction of more classrooms , as well as the provision of computer centers with modern computers and Internet to the communities in coordination with schools , churches or clubs . It continued its program of modernization of the state , strengthening the formulation and execution of the budget and promoting laws to make the public acquisition of goods and services transparent .
In 2008 , Fernndez was as elected for a third term . Fernndez and the PLD are credited with initiatives that have moved the country forward technologically , on the other hand , his administrations have been accused of corruption . Danilo Medina of the PLD was elected president in 2012 and re-elected in 2016 . On the other hand , a significant increase in crime , government corruption and a weak justice system threaten to overshadow their administrative period . He was succeeded by Luis Abinader in the 2020 Dominican Republic general election .
The Dominican Republic has the List of Latin American and Caribbean countries by GDP ( PPP ) ninth-largest economy in Latin America and is the largest economy in the Caribbean and Central American region . Over the last two decades , the Dominican Republic has had one of the fastest-growing economies in the Americas  with an average List of countries by real GDP growth rate of 5.4 % between 1992 and 2014 . GDP growth in 2014 and 2015 reached 7.3 and 7.0 % , respectively , the highest in the Western Hemisphere . In the first half of 2016 , the Dominican economy grew 7.4 % continuing its trend of rapid economic growth . Recent growth has been driven by construction , manufacturing , tourism , and mining . Private consumption has been strong , as a result of low inflation ( under 1 % on average in 2015 ) , job creation , as well as a high level of remittances .
== Geography ==
The Dominican Republic comprises the eastern five-eighths of Hispaniola , the second-largest island in the Greater Antilles , with the Atlantic Ocean to the north and the Caribbean Sea to the south . It shares the island roughly at a 2:1 ratio with Haiti , the north-to-south ( though somewhat irregular ) border between the two countries being . To the north and north-west lie The Bahamas and the Turks and Caicos Islands , and to the east , across the Mona Passage , the US Commonwealth of Puerto Rico . The country 's area is reported variously as ( by the embassy in the United States ) and , making it the second largest country in the Antilles , after Cuba . The Dominican Republic 's capital and largest city Santo Domingo is on the southern coast .
The Dominican Republic has four important mountain ranges . The most northerly is the Cordillera Septentrional ( `` Northern Mountain Range '' ) , which extends from the northwestern coastal town of San Fernando de Monte Cristi , near the Haitian border , to the Saman Peninsula in the east , running parallel to the Atlantic coast . The highest range in the Dominican Republic ;  indeed , in the whole of the West Indies ;  is the Cordillera Central , Dominican Republic ( `` Central Mountain Range '' ) . It gradually bends southwards and finishes near the town of Azua de Compostela , on the Caribbean coast . In the Cordillera Central are the four highest peaks in the Caribbean : Pico Duarte ( above sea level ) , La Pelona ( ) , La Rucilla ( ) , and Pico Yaque ( ) . In the southwest corner of the country , south of the Cordillera Central , there are two other ranges : the more northerly of the two is the Sierra de Neiba , while in the south the Sierra de Bahoruco is a continuation of the Massif de la Selle in Haiti . There are other , minor mountain ranges , such as the Cordillera Oriental ( `` Eastern Mountain Range '' ) , Sierra Martn Garca , Sierra de Yamas , and Sierra de Saman .
Between the Central and Northern mountain ranges lies the rich and fertile Cibao valley . This major valley is home to the cities of Santiago de los Caballeros and Concepcin de La Vega and most of the farming areas of the nation . Rather less productive are the semi-arid San Juan Valley , south of the Central Cordillera , and the Neiba Valley , tucked between the Sierra de Neiba and the Sierra de Bahoruco . Much of the land around the Lake Enriquillo Basin is below sea level , with a hot , arid , desert-like environment . There are other smaller valleys in the mountains , such as the Constanza , Dominican Republic , Jarabacoa , Villa Altagracia , and Bonao valleys .
The Llano Costero del Caribe ( `` Caribbean Coastal Plain '' ) is the largest of the plains in the Dominican Republic . Stretching north and east of Santo Domingo , it contains many sugar plantations in the savannahs that are common there . West of Santo Domingo its width is reduced to as it hugs the coast , finishing at the mouth of the Ocoa River . Another large plain is the Plena de Azua ( `` Azua Plain '' ) , a very arid region in Azua Province . A few other small coastal plains are on the northern coast and in the Pedernales Province Peninsula .
Four major rivers drain the numerous mountains of the Dominican Republic . The Yaque del Norte River is the longest and most important Dominican river . It carries excess water down from the Cibao Valley and empties into Monte Cristi Bay , in the northwest . Likewise , the Yuna River serves the Vega Real and empties into Saman Bay , in the northeast . Drainage of the San Juan Valley is provided by the San Juan River , tributary of the Yaque del Sur , which empties into the Caribbean , in the south . The Artibonite River is the longest river of Hispaniola and flows westward into Haiti .
There are many lakes and coastal lagoons . The largest lake is Lake Enriquillo , a salt lake at below sea level , the lowest elevation in the Caribbean . Other important lakes are Laguna de Rincn or Cabral , with freshwater , and Laguna de Oviedo , a lagoon with brackish water .
There are many small offshore islands and cays that form part of the Dominican territory . The two largest islands near shore are Saona Island , in the southeast , and Beata , in the southwest . Smaller islands include the Cayos Siete Hermanos , Isla Cabra , Cayo Jackson , Cayo Limn , Cayo Levantado , Cayo la Bocaina , Catalina Island ( Dominican Republic ) , Cayo Pisaje and Isla Alto Velo . To the north , at distances of , are three extensive , largely submerged Bank ( topography ) , which geographically are a southeast continuation of the Bahamas : Navidad Bank , Silver Bank , and Mouchoir Bank . Navidad Bank and Silver Bank have been officially claimed by the Dominican Republic . Isla Cabritos lies within Lago Enriquillo .
The Dominican Republic is located near fault action in the Caribbean . In 1946 , it suffered 1946 Dominican Republic earthquake a magnitude 8.1 earthquake off the northeast coast , triggering a tsunami that killed about 1,800 , mostly in coastal communities . Caribbean countries and the United States have collaborated to create tsunami warning systems and are mapping high-risk low-lying areas .
The country is home to five terrestrial ecoregions : Hispaniolan moist forests , Hispaniolan dry forests , Hispaniolan pine forests , Enriquillo wetlands , and Greater Antilles mangroves . It had a 2018 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 4.18/10 , ranking it 134th globally out of 172 countries .
=== Climate ===
The Dominican Republic has a tropical rainforest climate in the coastal and lowland areas . Some areas , such as most of the Cibao region , have a tropical savanna climate . Due to its diverse topography , Dominican Republic 's climate shows considerable variation over short distances and is the most varied of all the Antilles . The annual average temperature is . At higher elevations the temperature averages while near sea level the average temperature is . Low temperatures of are possible in the mountains while high temperatures of are possible in protected valleys . January and February are the coolest months of the year while August is the hottest month . Snowfall can be seen on rare occasions on the summit of Pico Duarte .
The wet season along the northern coast lasts from November through January . Elsewhere the wet season stretches from May through November , with May being the wettest month . Average annual rainfall is countrywide , with individual locations in the Valle de Neiba seeing averages as low as while the Cordillera Oriental averages . The driest part of the country lies in the west .
Tropical cyclones strike the Dominican Republic every couple of years , with 65 % of the impacts along the southern coast . Hurricanes are most likely between June and October . The last major hurricane that struck the country was Hurricane Georges in 1998.
== Government and politics ==
The Dominican Republic is a representative democracy or Democracy , with three branches of power : executive , Legislature , and Judiciary . The president of the Dominican Republic heads the executive branch and executes laws passed by the Congress of the Dominican Republic , appoints the cabinet , and is commander in chief of the Military of the Dominican Republic . The president and vice-president run for office on the same ticket and are elected by direct vote for 4-year terms . The national legislature is bicameral , composed of a Senate of the Dominican Republic , which has 32 members , and the Chamber of Deputies of the Dominican Republic , with 178 members .
Judicial authority rests with the Government of the Dominican Republic # Judicial branch 's 16 members . They are appointed by a council composed of the president , the leaders of both houses of Congress , the President of the Supreme Court , and an opposition or nongoverning-party member . The court `` alone hears actions against the president , designated members of his Cabinet , and members of Congress when the legislature is in session . ''
The Dominican Republic has a multi-party system multi-party political system . Elections are held every two years , alternating between the Elections in the Dominican Republic , which are held in years evenly divisible by four , and the congressional and municipal elections , which are held in even-numbered years not divisible by four . `` International observers have found that presidential and congressional elections since 1996 have been generally free and fair . '' The Central Elections Board ( JCE ) of nine members supervises elections , and its decisions are unappealable . Starting from 2016 , elections will be held jointly , after a constitutional reform .
=== Political culture ===
The three major parties are the conservative Social Christian Reformist Party ( Partido Reformista Social Cristiano ( PRSC ) ) , in power 196678 and 198696 ; and the Social democracy Dominican Revolutionary Party ( Partido Revolucionario Dominicano ( PRD ) ) , in power in 1963 , 197886 , and 200004 ; and the Dominican Liberation Party ( Partido de la Liberacin Dominicana ( PLD ) ) , in power 19962000 and since 2004.
The Dominican Republic presidential election , 2008 were held on May 16 , 2008 , with incumbent Leonel Fernndez winning 53 % of the vote . He defeated Miguel Vargas Maldonado , of the PRD , who achieved a 40.48 % share of the vote . Amable Aristy , of the PRSC , achieved 4.59 % of the vote . Other minority candidates , which included former Attorney General Guillermo Moreno Garcia from the Movement for Independence , Unity and Change ( Movimiento Independencia , Unidad y Cambio ( MIUCA ) ) , and PRSC former presidential candidate and defector Eduardo Estrella , obtained less than 1 % of the vote .
In the Dominican Republic presidential election , 2012 , the incumbent president Leonel Fernndez ( PLD ) declined his aspirations and instead the PLD elected Danilo Medina as its candidate . This time the PRD presented ex-president Hiplito Meja as its choice . The contest was won by Medina with 51.21 % of the vote , against 46.95 % in favor of Mejia . Candidate Guillermo Moreno obtained 1.37 % of the votes .
In 2014 , the Modern Revolutionary Party ( Partido revolucionario Moderno ) was created by a faction of leaders from the PRD and has since become the predominant opposition party , polling in second place for the upcoming May 2016 general elections .
=== Foreign relations ===
The Dominican Republic has a close relationship with the Dominican Republic-United States relations , and has close cultural ties with the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico , and other states and jurisdictions of the United States .
The Dominican Republic 's Dominican RepublicHaiti relations is strained over mass Haitian migration to the Dominican Republic , with citizens of the Dominican Republic blaming the Haitians for increased crime and other social problems . The Dominican Republic is a regular member of the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie .
The Dominican Republic has a Free-trade area with the United States , Costa Rica , El Salvador , Guatemala , Honduras and Nicaragua via the Dominican RepublicCentral America Free Trade Agreement Dominican Republic-Central America Free Trade Agreement . And an Economic Partnership Agreements with the European Union and the Caribbean Community via the CARIFORUM Caribbean Forum .
=== Military ===
Congress of the Dominican Republic authorizes a combined military force of 44,000 active duty personnel . Actual active duty strength is approximately 32,000 . Approximately 50 % of those are used for non-military activities such as security providers for government-owned non-military facilities , highway toll stations , prisons , forestry work , state enterprises , and private businesses . The commander in chief of the military is the president .
The army is larger than the other services combined with approximately 56,780 active duty personnel , consisting of six infantry brigades , a combat support brigade , and a combat service support brigade . The air force operates two main bases , one in the southern region near Santo Domingo and one in the northern region near Puerto Plata . The navy operates two major naval bases , one in Santo Domingo and one in Las Calderas on the southwestern coast , and maintains 12 operational vessels . The Dominican Republic has the largest military in the Caribbean region surpassing Cuba .
The armed forces have organized a Specialized Airport Security Corps ( CESA ) and a Specialized Port Security Corps ( CESEP ) to meet international security needs in these areas . The secretary of the armed forces has also announced plans to form a specialized border corps ( CESEF ) . The armed forces provide 75 % of personnel to the National Investigations Directorate ( DNI ) and the Counter-Drug Directorate ( DNCD ) .
The Dominican National Police force contains 32,000 agents . The police are not part of the Dominican armed forces but share some overlapping security functions . Sixty-three percent of the force serve in areas outside traditional police functions , similar to the situation of their military counterparts .
In 2018 , Dominican Republic signed the UN treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons .
=== Administrative divisions ===
The Dominican Republic is divided into 31 Provinces of the Dominican Republic . Santo Domingo , the capital , is designated Distrito Nacional ( National District ) . The provinces are divided into municipalities ( municipios ; singular municipio ) . They are the second-level political and Administrative division of the country . The president appoints the governors of the 31 provinces . Mayors and municipal councils administer the 124 municipal districts and the National District ( Santo Domingo ) . They are elected at the same time as congressional representatives .
The provinces are the firstlevel Administrative divisions of the country . The headquarters of the central government 's regional offices are normally found in the capital cities of provinces . The president appoints an administrative governor ( Gobernador Civil ) for each province but not for the Distrito Nacional ( Title IX of the constitution ) .
The Distrito Nacional was created in 1936 . Prior to this , the Distrito National was the old Santo Domingo Province , in existence since the country 's independence in 1844 . It is not to be confused with the new Santo Domingo Province split off from it in 2001 . While it is similar to a province in many ways , the Distrito Nacional differs in its lack of an administrative governor and consisting only of one municipality , Santo Domingo , the city council ( ayuntamiento ) and mayor ( sndico ) which are in charge of its administration .
}
== Economy ==
The Dominican Republic is the largest economy ( according to the U.S. State Department and the World Bank ) in the Caribbean and Central American region . It is an upper middle-income developing country , with a 2015 GDP per capita of US $ 14,770 , in Purchasing power parity terms . Over the last 25 years , the Dominican Republic has had the fastest-growing economy in the Americas  with an average real GDP growth rate of 5.53 % between 1992 and 2018 . GDP growth in 2014 and 2015 reached 7.3 and 7.0 % , respectively , the highest in the Western Hemisphere . In the first half of 2016 , the Dominican economy grew 7.4 % . , the average wage in nominal terms is US $ 392 per month ( RD $ 17,829 ) . The country is the site of the second largest gold mine in the world , the Pueblo Viejo mine .
During the last three decades , the Dominican economy , formerly dependent on the export of agricultural commodities ( mainly sugar , cocoa and coffee ) , has transitioned to a diversified mix of services , manufacturing , agriculture , mining , and trade . The service sector accounts for almost 60 % of GDP ; manufacturing , for 22 % ; tourism , telecommunications and finance are the main components of the service sector ; however , none of them accounts for more than 10 % of the whole . The Dominican Republic has a stock market , Bolsa de Valores de la Repblica Dominicana Bolsa de Valores de la Republica Dominicana ( BVRD ) . and advanced telecommunication system and transportation infrastructure . High unemployment and income inequality are long-term challenges . International migration affects the Dominican Republic greatly , as it receives and sends large flows of migrants . Mass illegal Haitian immigration and the integration of Dominicans of Haitian descent are major issues . A large Dominican diaspora exists , mostly Dominican Americans ( Dominican Republic ) , contributes to development , sending billions of dollars to Dominican families in remittances .
Remittances in Dominican Republic increased to US $ 4571.30 million in 2014 from US $ 3333 million in 2013 ( according to data reported by the Inter-American Development Bank ) . Economic growth takes place in spite of a chronic energy shortage , which causes frequent blackouts and very high prices . Despite a widening merchandise Balance of trade , tourism earnings and remittances have helped build foreign exchange reserves . Following economic turmoil in the late 1980s and 1990 , during which the gross domestic product ( GDP ) fell by up to 5 % and consumer price inflation reached an unprecedented 100 % , the Dominican Republic entered a period of growth and declining inflation until 2002 , after which the economy entered a recession .
This recession followed the collapse of the second-largest commercial bank in the country , Banco Intercontinental , linked to a major incident of fraud valued at US $ 3.5 billion . The Baninter fraud had a devastating effect on the Dominican economy , with GDP dropping by 1 % in 2003 as inflation ballooned by over 27 % . All defendants , including the star of the trial , Ramn Bez Figueroa ( the great-grandson of President Buenaventura Bez ) , were convicted .
According to the 2005 Annual Report of the United Nations Subcommittee on Human Development in the Dominican Republic , the country is ranked No . 71 in the world for resource availability , No . 79 for human development , and No . 14 in the world for resource mismanagement . These statistics emphasize national government corruption , foreign economic interference in the country , and the rift between the rich and poor .
The Dominican Republic has a noted problem of child labor in its coffee , rice , sugarcane , and tomato industries . The labor injustices in the sugarcane industry extend to forced labor according to the United States Department of Labor U.S. Department of Labor . Three large groups own 75 % of the land : the State Sugar Council ( Consejo Estatal del Azcar , CEA ) , Vicini , and Central Romana Corporation .
According to the 2016 Global Slavery Index , an estimated 104,800 people are enslaved in the modern day Dominican Republic , or 1.00 % of the population . Some slaves in the Dominican Republic are held on sugar plantations , guarded by men on horseback with rifles , and forced to work .
=== Currency ===
The Dominican peso ( abbreviated $ or RD $ ; ISO 4217 code is `` DOP '' ) is the national currency , with the United States dollar , the Euro , the Canadian dollar and the Swiss franc also accepted at most tourist sites . The exchange rate to the U.S. dollar , liberalized by 1985 , stood at 2.70 pesos per dollar in August 1986 , 14.00 pesos in 1993 , and 16.00 pesos in 2000. the rate was 50.08 pesos per dollar .
=== Tourism ===
The Dominican Republic is the world Tourism rankings in the Caribbean . The year-round golf courses are major attractions . A geographically diverse nation , the Dominican Republic is home to both the Caribbean 's tallest mountain peak , Pico Duarte , and the Caribbean 's largest lake and point of lowest elevation , Lake Enriquillo . The island has an average temperature of and great climatic and biological diversity . The country is also the site of the first cathedral , castle , monastery , and fortress built in the Americas , located in Santo Domingo 's Ciudad Colonial ( Santo Domingo ) , a World Heritage Site .
Tourism is one of the fueling factors in the Dominican Republic 's economic growth . The Dominican Republic is the most popular tourist destination in the Caribbean . With the construction of projects like Cap Cana , San Souci Port in Santo Domingo , Casa de Campo , Dominican Republic and the Hard Rock Hotel & Casino ( ancient Moon Palace Resort ) in Punta Cana , the Dominican Republic expects increased tourism activity in the upcoming years .
Ecotourism has also been a topic increasingly important in this nation , with towns like Jarabacoa and neighboring Constanza , Dominican Republic , and locations like the Pico Duarte , Bahia de las Aguilas , and others becoming more significant in efforts to increase direct benefits from tourism . Most residents from other countries Visa policy of the Dominican Republic , depending on the country they live in . In the last 10 years the Dominican Republic has become one of the worlds notably progressive states in terms of recycling and waste disposal . A UN report cited there was a 221.3 % efficiency increase in the previous 10 years due , in part , to the opening of the largest open air landfill site located in the north 10 ; km from the Haitian border .
== Infrastructure ==
=== Transportation ===
The country has three national trunk highways , which connect every major town . These are DR-1 , DR-2 , and DR-3 , which depart from Santo Domingo toward the northern ( Cibao ) , southwestern ( Sur ) , and eastern ( El Este ) parts of the country respectively . These highways have been consistently improved with the expansion and reconstruction of many sections . Two other national highways serve as spur ( DR-5 ) or alternative routes ( DR-4 ) .
In addition to the national highways , the government has embarked on an expansive reconstruction of spur secondary routes , which connect smaller towns to the trunk routes . In the last few years the government constructed a 106-kilometer toll road that connects Santo Domingo with the country 's northeastern peninsula . Travelers may now arrive in the Saman Peninsula in less than two hours . Other additions are the reconstruction of the DR-28 ( Jarabacoa ;  Constanza ) and DR-12 ( Constanza ;  Bonao ) . Despite these efforts , many secondary routes still remain either unpaved or in need of maintenance . There is currently a nationwide program to pave these and other commonly used routes . Also , the Santiago light rail system is in planning stages but currently on hold .
=== Bus services ===
There are two main bus transportation services in the Dominican Republic : one controlled by the government , through the Oficina Tcnica de Transito Terrestre ( OTTT ) and the Oficina Metropolitana de Servicios de Autobuses ( OMSA ) , and the other controlled by private business , among them , Federacin Nacional de Transporte La Nueva Opcin ( FENATRANO ) and the Confederacion Nacional de Transporte ( CONATRA ) . The government transportation system covers large routes in metropolitan areas such as Santo Domingo and Santiago .
There are many privately owned bus companies , such as Metro Servicios Tursticos and Caribe Tours , that run daily routes .
=== Santo Domingo Metro ===
The Dominican Republic has a rapid transit system in Santo Domingo , the country 's capital . It is the most extensive metro system in the insular Caribbean and Central American region by length and number of stations . The Santo Domingo Metro is part of a major `` National Master Plan '' to improve transportation in Santo Domingo as well as the rest of the nation . The first line was planned to relieve traffic congestion in the DR-1 and DR-13 . The second line , which opened in April 2013 , is meant to relieve the congestion along the DR-13 Duarte-Kennedy-Centenario Corridor in the city from west to east . The current length of the Metro , with the sections of the two lines open , is . Before the opening of the second line , 30,856,515 passengers rode the Santo Domingo Metro in 2012 . With both lines opened , ridership increased to 61,270,054 passengers in 2014.
=== Communications ===
The Dominican Republic has a well developed Telecommunications in the Dominican Republic infrastructure , with extensive mobile phone and landline services . Cable Internet access and Digital subscriber line are available in most parts of the country , and many Internet service providers offer 3G wireless internet service . The Dominican Republic became the second country in Latin America to have 4G LTE wireless service . The reported speeds are from 1 Mbit/s up to 100 Mbit/s for residential services .
For commercial service there are speeds from 256 kbit/s up to 154 Mbit/s . ( Each set of numbers denotes Cable Internet access downstream/upstream speed ; that is , to the user/from the user . ) Projects to extend Wi-Fi hot spots have been made in Santo Domingo . The country 's commercial radio stations and television stations are in the process of transferring to the Data transmission , via HD Radio and High-definition television after officially adopting Advanced Television Systems Committee standards as the digital medium in the country with a switch-off of analog transmission by September 2015 . The telecommunications regulator in the country is INDOTEL ( Instituto Dominicano de Telecomunicaciones ) .
The largest telecommunications company is Claro Repblica Dominicana ;  part of Carlos Slim 's Amrica Mvil ;  which provides wireless , landline , broadband , and IPTV services . In June 2009 there were more than 8 million phone line subscribers ( land and cell users ) in the D.R. , representing 81 % of the country 's population and a fivefold increase since the year 2000 , when there were 1.6 million . The communications sector generates about 3.0 % of the GDP . There were 2,439,997 Internet users in March 2009.
In November 2009 , the Dominican Republic became the first Latin American country to pledge to include a `` gender perspective '' in every information and communications technology ( ICT ) initiative and policy developed by the government . This is part of the regional eLAC Action Plans plan . The tool the Dominicans have chosen to design and evaluate all the public policies is the APC Gender Evaluation Methodology ( GEM ) .
=== Electricity ===
Electric power service has been unreliable since the Trujillo era , and as much as 75 % of the equipment is that old . The country 's antiquated power grid causes transmission losses that account for a large share of billed electricity from generators . The privatization of the sector started under a previous administration of Leonel Fernndez . The recent investment in a 345 kilovolt `` Santo DomingoSantiago Electrical Highway '' with reduced Electric power transmission # Losses , is being heralded as a major capital improvement to the national grid since the mid-1960s .
During the Trujillo regime electrical service was introduced to many cities . Almost 95 % of usage was not billed at all . Around half of the Dominican Republic 's 2.1 million houses have no meters and most do not pay or pay a fixed monthly rate for their electric service .
Household and general electrical service is delivered at 110 volts alternating at 60 ; Hertz . Electrically powered items from the United States work with no modifications . The majority of the Dominican Republic has access to electricity . Tourist areas tend to have more reliable power , as do business , travel , healthcare , and vital infrastructure . Concentrated efforts were announced to increase efficiency of delivery to places where the collection rate reached 70 % . The electricity sector is highly politicized . Some generating companies are undercapitalized and at times unable to purchase adequate fuel supplies .
== Society ==
=== Demographics ===
The Dominican Republic 's population was in . In 2010 , 31.2 % of the population was under 15 years of age , with 6 % of the population over 65 years of age . There were an estimated 102.3 males for every 100 females in 2020 . The annual population growth rate for 20062007 was 1.5 % , with the projected population for the year 2015 being 10,121,000.
The population density in 2007 was 192 per km2 ( 498 per sq mi ) , and 63 % of the population lived in urban areas . The southern coastal plains and the Cibao Valley are the most densely populated areas of the country . The capital city Santo Domingo had a population of 2,907,100 in 2010.
Other important cities are Santiago de los Caballeros ( 745,293 ) , La Romana , Dominican Republic ( pop . 214,109 ) , San Pedro de Macors ( pop . 185,255 ) , Higey ( 153,174 ) , San Francisco de Macors ( pop . 132,725 ) , San Felipe de Puerto Plata ( pop . 118,282 ) , and Concepcin de la Vega ( pop . 104,536 ) . Per the United Nations , the urban population growth rate for 20002005 was 2.3 % .
=== Ethnic groups ===
In a 2014 population survey , 70.4 % self-identified as mixed ( mestizo/indio 58 % , mulatto 12.4 % ) , 15.8 % as Afro-Dominican ( Dominican Republic ) , 13.5 % as White Dominicans , and 0.3 % as `` other '' . Ethnic immigrant groups in the country include Southwest Asiamostly Lebanese people , Syrian people , and Palestinian people ; the current president , Luis Abinader , is of Lebanese descent . East Asians , primarily Ethnic Chinese in the Dominican Republic and Japanese settlement in the Dominican Republic , can also be found . Europeans are represented mostly by Spanish people whites but also with smaller populations of Ashkenazi Jews , Italian people , Portuguese people , British people , Dutch people , Danes , and Hungarian people . Some converted Sephardic Jews from Spain were part of early expeditions ; only Catholics were allowed to come to the New World . Later there were Jewish migrants coming from the Iberian peninsula and other parts of Europe in the 1700s . Some managed to reach the Caribbean as refugees during and after the Second World War . Some Sephardic Jews reside in Sosa while others are dispersed throughout the country . Who is a Jew ? Self-identified Jews number about 3,000 ; other Dominicans may have some Jewish ancestry because of marriages among converted Jewish Catholics and other Dominicans since the colonial years . Some Dominicans born in the United States now reside in the Dominican Republic , creating a kind of expatriate community .
=== Languages ===
The population of the Dominican Republic is mostly Spanish language-speaking . The local Variation ( linguistics ) of Spanish is called Dominican Spanish , which closely resembles other Spanish vernaculars in the Caribbean and has similarities to Canarian Spanish . In addition , it has influences from African languages and borrowed words from Indigenous languages of the Americas # South America and the Caribbean particular to the island of Hispaniola . Schools are based on a Spanish educational model ; English and French are mandatory foreign languages in both private and public schools , although the quality of foreign languages teaching is poor . Some private educational institutes provide teaching in other languages , notably Italian , Japanese and Mandarin .
Haitian Creole is the largest minority language in the Dominican Republic and is spoken by Haitians immigrants and their descendants . There is a community of a few thousand people whose ancestors spoke Saman English in the Saman Peninsula . They are the descendants of formerly enslaved African Americans who arrived in the nineteenth century , but only a few elders speak the language today . Tourism , American pop culture , the influence of Dominican Americans , and the country 's economic ties with the United States motivate other Dominicans to learn English . The Dominican Republic is ranked 2nd in Latin America and 23rd in the World on English Language proficiency .
=== Population centres ===
=== Religion ===
95.0 % Christians
2.6 % No religion
2.2 % Other religions
, 57 % of the population ( 5.7 million ) identified themselves as Roman Catholics and 23 % ( 2.3 million ) as Protestants ( in Latin American countries , Protestants are often called Evangelicos because they emphasize personal and public evangelising and many are Evangelical Protestant or of a Pentecostal group ) . From 1896 to 1907 missionaries from the Episcopal Church ( United States ) , Free Methodist , Seventh-day Adventist and Moravians churches began work in the Dominican Republic . Three percent of the 10.63 million Dominican Republic population are Seventh-day Adventists . Recent immigration as well as proselytizing efforts have brought in other religious groups , with the following shares of the population : Spiritist : 2.2 % , The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints : 1.3 % , Buddhism : 0.1 % , Bah Faith : 0.1 % , Chinese Folk Religion : 0.1 % , Islam : 0.02 % , Judaism : 0.01 % .
The Catholic Church began to lose its strong dominance in the late 19th century . This was due to a lack of funding , priests , and support programs . During the same time , Protestant Evangelicalism began to gain a wider support `` with their emphasis on personal responsibility and family rejuvenation , economic entrepreneurship , and biblical fundamentalism '' . The Dominican Republic has two Catholic patroness saints : Nuestra Seora de la Altagracia ( Our Lady Of High Grace ) and Nuestra Seora de las Mercedes ( Our Lady Of Mercy ) .
The Dominican Republic has historically granted extensive religious freedom . According to the United States Department of State , `` The constitution specifies that there is no state church and provides for freedom of religion and belief . A concordat with the Vatican designates Catholicism as the official religion and extends special privileges to the Catholic Church not granted to other religious groups . These include the legal recognition of church law , use of public funds to underwrite some church expenses , and complete exoneration from customs duties . '' In the 1950s restrictions were placed upon churches by the government of Trujillo . Letters of protest were sent against the mass arrests of government adversaries . Trujillo began a campaign against the Catholic Church and planned to arrest priests and bishops who preached against the government . This campaign ended before it was put into place , with his assassination .
During World War II a group of Jews escaping Nazi Germany fled to the Dominican Republic and founded the city of Sosa . It has remained the center of the Jewish population since .
=== 20th century immigration ===
In the 20th century , many Arabs ( from Lebanon , Syria , and Palestine ( region ) ) , Japanese , and , to a lesser degree , Koreans settled in the country as agricultural laborers and merchants . The Chinese companies found business in telecom , mining , and railroads . The Arab community is rising at an increasing rate and is estimated at 80,000.
In addition , there are descendants of immigrants who came from other Caribbean islands , including St. Kitts and Nevis , Antigua , Saint Vincent ( island ) St. Vincent , Montserrat , Tortola , Saint Croix , U.S. Virgin Islands St. Croix , St. Thomas , U.S. Virgin Islands St. Thomas , and Guadeloupe . They worked on sugarcane plantations and docks and settled mainly in the cities of San Pedro de Macors and Puerto Plata ( city ) . Puerto Rican , and to a lesser extent , Cuban immigrants fled to the Dominican Republic from the mid-1800s until about 1940 due to a poor economy and social unrest in their respective home countries . Many Puerto Rican immigrants settled in Higey ( city ) , among other cities , and quickly assimilated due to similar culture . Before and during World War II , 800 Jewish refugees moved to the Dominican Republic .
Numerous immigrants have come from other Caribbean countries , as the country has offered economic opportunities . There is an increasing number of Puerto Rican people immigrants , especially in and around Santo Domingo ; they are believed to number around 10,000 . There are over 700,000 people of Haitian descent , including a generation born in the Dominican Republic .
==== Haitian immigration ====
Haiti is the neighboring nation to the Dominican Republic and is considerably poorer , less developed and is additionally the least developed country in the western hemisphere . In 2003 , 80 % of all Haitians were poor ( 54 % living in abject poverty ) and 47.1 % were illiterate . The country of nine million people also has a fast growing population , but over two-thirds of the labor force lack formal jobs . Haiti 's per capita GDP ( PPP ) was $ 1,800 in 2017 , or just over one-tenth of the Dominican figure .
As a result , hundreds of thousands of Haitians have migrated to the Dominican Republic , with some estimates of 800,000 Haitians in the country , while others put the Haitian-born population as high as one million . They usually work at low-paying and unskilled jobs in building construction and house cleaning and in sugar plantations . There have been accusations that some Haitian immigrants work in slavery-like conditions and are severely exploited .
Due to the lack of basic amenities and medical facilities in Haiti a large number of Haitian women , often arriving with several health problems , cross the border to Dominican soil . They deliberately come during their last weeks of pregnancy to obtain medical attention for childbirth , since Dominican public hospitals do not refuse medical services based on nationality or legal status . Statistics from a hospital in Santo Domingo report that over 22 % of childbirths are by Haitian mothers .
Haiti also Environmental issues in Haiti . Deforestation is rampant in Haiti ; today less than 4 percent of Haiti 's forests remain , and in many places the soil has eroded right down to the bedrock . Haitians burn wood charcoal for 60 % of their domestic energy production . Because of Haiti running out of plant material to burn , some Haitian bootleggers have created an illegal market for charcoal on the Dominican side . Conservative estimates calculate the illegal movement of 115 tons of charcoal per week from the Dominican Republic to Haiti . Dominican officials estimate that at least 10 trucks per week are crossing the border loaded with charcoal .
In 2005 , Dominican President Leonel Fernndez criticized collective expulsions of Haitians as having taken place `` in an abusive and inhuman way . '' After a UN delegation issued a preliminary report stating that it found a profound problem of racism and discrimination against people of Haitian origin , Dominican Foreign Minister Carlos Morales Troncoso issued a formal statement denouncing it , asserting that `` our border with Haiti has its problems [ ; ] this is our reality and it must be understood . It is important not to confuse national sovereignty with indifference , and not to confuse security with xenophobia . ''
The children of Haitian immigrants are eligible for Haitian nationality , are denied it by Haiti because of a lack of proper documents or witnesses .
=== Emigration ===
The first of three late-20th century emigration waves began in 1961 after the assassination of dictator Trujillo , due to fear of retaliation by Trujillo 's allies and political uncertainty in general . In 1965 , the United States began a military occupation of the Dominican Republic to end a civil war . Upon this , the U.S. eased travel restrictions , making it easier for Dominicans to obtain U.S. visas . From 1966 to 1978 , the exodus continued , fueled by high unemployment and political repression . Communities established by the first wave of immigrants to the U.S. created a network that assisted subsequent arrivals .
In the early 1980s , underemployment , inflation , and the rise in value of the dollar all contributed to a third wave of emigration from the Dominican Republic . Today , emigration from the Dominican Republic remains high . In 2012 , there were approximately 1.7 million people of Dominican descent in the U.S. , counting both native- and foreign-born . There was also a growing Dominican Republic immigration to Puerto Rico , with nearly 70,000 Dominicans living there . Although that number is slowly decreasing and immigration trends have reversed because of Puerto Rico 's economic crisis .
There is a significant Dominican population in Spain .
=== Health ===
In 2020 , the Dominican Republic had an estimated birth rate of 18.5 per 1000 and a death rate of 6.3 per 1000.
=== Education ===
Primary education is regulated by the Ministry of Education , with education being a right of all citizens and youth in the Dominican Republic .
Preschool education is organized in different cycles and serves the 24 age group and the 46 age group . Preschool education is not mandatory except for the last year . Basic education is compulsory and serves the population of the 614 age group . Secondary education is not compulsory , although it is the duty of the state to offer it for free . It caters to the 1418 age group and is organized in a common core of four years and three modes of two years of study that are offered in three different options : general or academic , vocational ( industrial , agricultural , and services ) , and artistic .
The higher education system consists of institutes and universities . The institutes offer courses of a higher technical level . The universities offer technical careers , undergraduate and graduate ; these are regulated by the Ministry of Higher Education , Science and Technology .
=== Crime ===
In 2012 , the Dominican Republic had a List of countries by intentional homicide rate of 22.1 per 100,000 population . There was a total of 2,268 murders in the Dominican Republic in 2012.
The Dominican Republic has become a trans-shipment point for Colombian drugs destined for Europe as well as the United States and Canada . Money-laundering via the Dominican Republic is favored by Colombian drug cartels for the ease of illicit financial transactions . In 2004 , it was estimated that 8 % of all cocaine smuggled into the United States had come through the Dominican Republic . The Dominican Republic responded with increased efforts to seize drug shipments , arrest and extradite those involved , and combat money-laundering .
The often light treatment of violent criminals has been a continuous source of local controversy . In April 2010 , five teenagers , aged 15 to 17 , shot and killed two taxi drivers and killed another five by forcing them to drink drain-cleaning acid . On September 24 , 2010 , the teens were sentenced to prison terms of three to five years , despite the protests of the taxi drivers ' families .
== Culture ==
Due to cultural syncretism , the culture and customs of the Dominican people have a European culture , influenced by both African culture and native Tano elements , although endogenous elements have emerged within Dominican culture ; culturally the Dominican Republic is among the most-European countries in Spanish America , alongside Culture of Puerto Rico , Culture of Cuba , Central Chile , Culture of Argentina , and Culture of Uruguay . Spanish institutions in the colonial era were able to predominate in the Dominican culture 's making-of as a relative success in the acculturation and cultural assimilation of African slaves diminished African cultural influence in comparison to other Caribbean countries .
Music and sport are of great importance in the Dominican culture , with Merengue music and Bachata ( music ) as the national dance and music , and baseball as the favorite sport .
=== Visual arts ===
Dominican art is perhaps most commonly associated with the bright , vibrant colors and images that are sold in every tourist gift shop across the country . However , the country has a long history of fine art that goes back to the middle of the 1800s when the country became independent and the beginnings of a national art scene emerged .
Historically , the painting of this time were centered around images connected to national independence , historical scenes , portraits but also landscapes and images of still life . Styles of painting ranged between neoclassicism and romanticism . Between 1920 and 1940 the art scene was influenced by styles of realism ( arts ) and impressionism . Dominican artists were focused on breaking from previous , academic styles in order to develop more independent and individual styles .
=== Literature ===
The 20th century brought many prominent Dominican writers , and saw a general increase in the perception of Dominican literature . Writers such as Juan Bosch ( politician ) ( one of the greatest storytellers in Latin America ) , Pedro Mir ( national poet of the Dominican Republic ) , Aida Cartagena Portalatin ( poetess par excellence who spoke in the Era of Rafael Trujillo ) , Emilio Rodrguez Demorizi ( the most important Dominican historian , with more than 1000 written works ) , Manuel del Cabral ( main Dominican poet featured in black poetry ) , Hector Inchustegui Cabral ( considered one of the most prominent voices of the Caribbean social poetry of the twentieth century ) , Miguel Alfonseca ( poet belonging to Generation 60 ) , Rene del Risco ( acclaimed poet who was a participant in the June 14 Movement ) , Mateo Morrison ( excellent poet and writer with numerous awards ) , among many more prolific authors , put the island in one of the most important in Literature in the twentieth century .
New 21st century Dominican writers have not yet achieved the renown of their 20th century counterparts . However , writers such as Frank Bez ( won the 2006 Santo Domingo Book Fair First Prize ) and Junot Daz ( 2008 Pulitzer Prize for Fiction for his novel The Brief Wondrous Life of Oscar Wao ) lead Dominican literature in the 21st century .
=== Architecture ===
The architecture in the Dominican Republic represents a complex blend of diverse cultures . The deep influence of the European colonists is the most evident throughout the country . Characterized by ornate designs and baroque architecture structures , the style can best be seen in the capital city of Santo Domingo , which is home to the first cathedral , castle , monastery , and fortress in all of the Americas , located in the city 's Ciudad Colonial ( Santo Domingo ) , an area declared as a World Heritage Site by UNESCO . The designs carry over into the villas and buildings throughout the country . It can also be observed on buildings that contain stucco exteriors , arched doors and windows , and red tiled roofs .
The indigenous peoples of the Dominican Republic have also had a significant influence on the architecture of the country . The Tano people relied heavily on the mahogany and guano ( dried palm tree leaf ) to put together crafts , artwork , furniture , and houses . Utilizing mud , thatched roofs , and mahogany trees , they gave buildings and the furniture inside a natural look , seamlessly blending in with the island 's surroundings .
Lately , with the rise in tourism and increasing popularity as a Caribbean vacation destination , architects in the Dominican Republic have now begun to incorporate cutting-edge designs that emphasize luxury . In many ways an architectural playground , villas and hotels implement new styles , while offering new takes on the old . This new style is characterized by simplified , angular corners and large windows that blend outdoor and indoor spaces . As with the culture as a whole , contemporary architects embrace the Dominican Republic 's rich history and various cultures to create something new . Surveying modern villas , one can find any combination of the three major styles : a villa may contain angular , modernist building construction , Spanish Colonial-style arched windows , and a traditional Tano hammock in the bedroom balcony .
=== Cuisine ===
Dominican cuisine is predominantly Spanish cuisine # Spanish regional variation : typical dishes and meal routines , Tano # Food and agriculture , and African cuisine . The typical cuisine is quite similar to what can be found in other Latin American countries . One breakfast dish consists of eggs and Mang ( dish ) ( mashed , boiled plantain ) . Heartier versions of mang are accompanied by deep-fried meat ( Dominican salami , typically ) , cheese , or both . Lunch , generally the largest and most important meal of the day , usually consists of rice , meat , beans , and salad . `` La Bandera '' ( literally `` The Flag '' ) is the most popular lunch dish ; it consists of meat and red beans on white rice . Sancocho is a stew often made with seven varieties of meat .
Meals tend to favor meats and starches over dairy products and vegetables . Many dishes are made with sofrito , which is a mix of local herbs used as a wet rub for meats and sauted to bring out all of a dish 's flavors . Throughout the south-central coast , bulgur , or whole wheat , is a main ingredient in Tabbouleh ( bulgur salad ) . Other favorite Dominican foods include chicharrn , Cassava , Tapioca , Cuban pastry ( empanadas ) , Sweet potato , Yam ( vegetable ) , Pasteles , chimichurris , and tostones .
Some treats Dominicans enjoy are Rice pudding ( or arroz con dulce ) , Bizcocho Dominicano ( lit . Dominican cake ) , [ con dulce ] , Crme caramel , Snow cone ( snow cones ) , dulce de leche , and caa ( sugarcane ) . The beverages Dominicans enjoy are Morir Soando , rum , beer , Mama Juana , batida ( smoothie ) , jugos naturales ( freshly squeezed fruit juices ) , Mauby , coffee , and chaca ( dessert ) ( also called maiz caqueao/casqueado , maiz con dulce and maiz con leche ) , the last item being found only in the southern provinces of the country such as San Juan .
=== Music and dance ===
Musically , the Dominican Republic is known for the Popular culture musical style and genre called Merengue music , a type of lively , fast-paced rhythm and dance music consisting of a tempo of about 120 to 160 beats per minute ( though it varies ) based on musical elements like drums , brass , chorded instruments , and accordion , as well as some elements unique to the Spanish-speaking Caribbean , such as the tambora ( Dominican drum ) and gira .
Its Syncopation use Latin percussion , brass instruments , bass , and piano or keyboard . Between 1937 and 1950 merengue music was promoted internationally by Dominican groups like Billo 's Caracas Boys , Chapuseaux and Damiron `` Los Reyes del Merengue , '' Joseito Mateo , and others . Radio , television , and international media popularized it further . Some well known merengue performers are Wilfrido Vargas , Johnny Ventura , singer-songwriter Los Hermanos Rosario , Juan Luis Guerra , Fernando Villalona , Eddy Herrera , Sergio Vargas , Too Rosario , Milly Quezada , and Chich Peralta .
Merengue became popular in the United States , mostly on the East Coast of the United States , during the 1980s and 1990s , when many Dominican artists residing in the U.S. ( particularly New York ) started performing in the Latin club scene and gained radio airplay . They included Victor Roque y La Gran Manzana , Henry Hierro , Zacarias Ferreira , Aventura , and Milly Jocelyn Y Los Vecinos . The emergence of Bachata ( music ) , along with an increase in the number of Dominicans living among other Hispanic and Latino Americans groups in New York , New Jersey , and Florida , has contributed to Dominican music 's overall growth in popularity .
Bachata ( music ) , a form of music and dance that originated in the countryside and rural marginal neighborhoods of the Dominican Republic , has become quite popular in recent years . Its subjects are often romantic ; especially prevalent are tales of heartbreak and sadness . In fact , the original name for the genre was amargue ( `` bitterness , '' or `` bitter music , '' ) , until the rather ambiguous ( and mood-neutral ) term bachata became popular . Bachata grew out of , and is still closely related to , the Pan-Latinism pan-Latin American romantic style called bolero . Over time , it has been influenced by merengue and by a variety of Latin American guitar styles .
Palo music is an Afro-Dominican ( Dominican Republic ) Afro-Dominican sacred music that can be found throughout the island . The drum and human voice are the principal instruments . Palo is played at religious ceremoniesusually coinciding with saints ' religious feast daysas well as for secular parties and special occasions . Its roots are in the Congo region of central-west Africa , but it is mixed with European influences in the melodies .
Salsa music has had a great deal of popularity in the country . During the late 1960s Dominican musicians like Johnny Pacheco , creator of the Fania All Stars , played a significant role in the development and popularization of the genre .
Dominican rock and Reggaeton are also popular . Many , if not the majority , of its performers are based in Santo Domingo and Santiago .
=== Fashion ===
The country boasts one of the ten most important design schools in the region , La Escuela de Diseo de Altos de Chavn , which is making the country a key player in the world of fashion and design . Noted fashion designer Oscar de la Renta was born in the Dominican Republic in 1932 , and became a US citizen in 1971 . He studied under the leading Spaniard designer Cristbal Balenciaga and then worked with the house of Lanvin ( clothing ) in Paris . By 1963 , he had designs bearing his own label . After establishing himself in the US , de la Renta opened boutiques across the country . His work blends French and Spaniard fashion with American styles . Although he settled in New York , de la Renta also marketed his work in Latin America , where it became very popular , and remained active in his native Dominican Republic , where his charitable activities and personal achievements earned him the Juan Pablo Duarte Order of Merit and the Order of Cristbal Coln . De la Renta died of complications from cancer on October 20 , 2014.
=== National symbols ===
Some of the Dominican Republic 's important symbols are the Flag of the Dominican Republic , Coat of arms of the Dominican Republic , and the national anthem , titled National Anthem of the Dominican Republic . The flag has a large white cross that divides it into four quarters . Two quarters are red and two are blue . Red represents the blood shed by the liberators . Blue expresses God 's protection over the nation . The white cross symbolizes the struggle of the liberators to bequeath future generations a free nation . An alternative interpretation is that blue represents the ideals of progress and liberty , whereas white symbolizes peace and unity among Dominicans .
In the center of the cross is the Dominican coat of arms , in the same colors as the national flag . The coat of arms pictures a red , white , and blue flag-draped shield with a Bible , a gold cross , and arrows ; the shield is surrounded by an olive branch ( on the left ) and a palm branch ( on the right ) . The Bible traditionally represents the truth and the light . The gold cross symbolizes the redemption from slavery , and the arrows symbolize the noble soldiers and their proud military . A blue ribbon above the shield reads , `` Dios , Patria , Libertad '' ( meaning `` God , Fatherland , Liberty '' ) . A red ribbon under the shield reads , `` Repblica Dominicana '' ( meaning `` Dominican Republic '' ) . Out of all the flags in the world , the depiction of a Bible is unique to the Dominican flag .
The Floral emblem is the Pereskia quisqueyana and the national tree is the Swietenia mahagoni . The national bird is the Cigua Palmera or Palmchat ( `` Dulus dominicus '' ) .
The Dominican Republic celebrates Dia de la Altagracia on January 21 in honor of its patroness , Juan Pablo Duarte 's Day on January 26 in honor of one of its founding fathers , Independence Day on February 27 , Dominican Restoration War on August 16 , Virgen de las Mercedes on September 24 , and Constitution Day on November 6.
=== Sports ===
Baseball is by far the most popular sport in the Dominican Republic . The country has a baseball league of six teams . Its season usually begins in October and ends in January . After the United States , the Dominican Republic has the second highest number of Major League Baseball ( MLB ) players . Ozzie Virgil Sr. became the first Dominican-born player in the MLB on September 23 , 1956 . Juan Marichal , Pedro Martnez , and Vladimir Guerrero are the only Dominican-born players in the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum . Other notable baseball players born in the Dominican Republic are Jos Bautista , Adrin Beltr , George Bell ( outfielder ) , Robinson Can , Rico Carty , Bartolo Coln , Nelson Cruz , Edwin Encarnacin , Ubaldo Jimnez , Francisco Liriano , David Ortiz , Plcido Polanco , Albert Pujols , Hanley Ramrez , Manny Ramrez , Jos Reyes ( shortstop ) , Sammy Sosa , and Miguel Tejada . Felipe Alou has also enjoyed success as a manager and Omar Minaya as a general manager . In 2013 , the Dominican team went undefeated en route to winning the 2013 World Baseball Classic .
In boxing , the country has produced scores of world-class fighters and several world champions , such as Carlos Cruz ( boxer ) , his brother Leo Cruz , Juan Guzman ( boxer ) , and Joan Guzman . Basketball also enjoys a relatively high level of popularity . Tito Horford , his son Al Horford , Felipe Lpez ( basketball ) , and Francisco Garca ( basketball ) are among the Dominican-born players currently or formerly in the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) . Olympic gold medalist and world champion hurdler Flix Snchez hails from the Dominican Republic , as does National Football League defensive end Luis Castillo ( American football ) .
Other important sports are volleyball , introduced in 1916 by U.S. Marines and controlled by the Dominican Volleyball Federation , taekwondo , in which Gabriel Mercedes won an Olympic silver medal in 2008 , and judo .
== See also ==
* Index of Dominican Republic-related articles
* Outline of the Dominican Republic
== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Bibliography ===
*
== Further reading ==
* Wiarda , Howard J. , and Michael J. Kryzanek . The Dominican Republic : a Caribbean Crucible , in series , Nations of Contemporary Latin America , and also Westview Profiles . Boulder , Colo. : Westview Press , 1982. pbk .
* Jared Diamond , Collapse : How Societies Choose to Fail or Succeed , Penguin Books , 2005 and 2011 ( ) . See chapter 11 entitled `` One Island , Two People , Two Histories : The Dominican Republic and Haiti '' .
== External links ==
* Presidency of the Dominican Republic
* Official country website
* Dominican Republic at UCB Libraries GovPubs
* Dominican Republic profile from the BBC News
* Official Website of the Ministry of Tourism of the Dominican Republic
* Official Commercial Website Ministry of Tourism of the Dominican Republic
* Official Website of the IDDI , Instituto Dominicano de Desarrollo Integral
* Caribbean Connections : Dominican Republic teaching guide for middle and high school students
Category : Dominican Republic
Category:1844 establishments in North America
Category : Christian states
Category : Countries in North America
Category : Countries in the Caribbean
Category : Former French colonies
Category : Former Spanish colonies
Category : Former colonies in North America
Category : New Spain
Category : Greater Antilles
Category : Island countries
Category : Member states of the United Nations
Category : Republics
Category : Small Island Developing States
Category : Spanish Caribbean
Category : Spanish West Indies
Category:1492 establishments in the Spanish West Indies
Category:1821 establishments in the Dominican Republic
Category:1822 establishments in Haiti
Category:1844 disestablishments in Haiti
Category:1861 establishments in the Spanish West Indies
Category:1865 disestablishments in the Spanish West Indies
Category : Spanish-speaking countries and territories
Category : Spanish colonization of the Americas
Category : States and territories established in 1844 <article_end> <article_start>  
Honduras , officially the Republic of Honduras , is a country in Central America . The republic of Honduras is bordered to the west by Guatemala , to the southwest by El Salvador , to the southeast by Nicaragua , to the south by the Pacific Ocean at the Gulf of Fonseca , and to the north by the Gulf of Honduras , a large inlet of the Caribbean Sea .
Honduras was home to several important Mesoamerican cultures , most notably the Maya civilization , before the Spanish colonization of the Americas in the sixteenth century . The Spanish introduced Roman Catholicism and the now predominant Spanish language , along with numerous customs that have blended with the indigenous culture . Honduras became independent in 1821 and has since been a republic , although it has consistently endured much social strife and political instability , and remains one of the poorest countries in the Western Hemisphere . In 1960 , the northern part of what was the Mosquito Coast was transferred from Nicaragua to Honduras by the International Court of Justice .
The nation 's economy is primarily agricultural , making it especially vulnerable to natural disasters such as Hurricane Mitch in 1998 . The lower class is primarily agriculturally based while wealth is concentrated in the country 's urban centers . Honduras has a Human Development Index of 0.625 , classifying it as a nation with medium development . When the Index is adjusted for income inequality , its Inequality-adjusted Human Development Index is 0.443.
Honduran society is predominantly Mestizo ; however , American Indian , black and white individuals also live in Honduras ( 2017 ) . The nation had a relatively high political stability until its 2009 Honduran coup d'tat and again with the 2017 Honduran general election .
Honduras spans about and has a population exceeding million . Its northern portions are part of the western Caribbean zone , as reflected in the area 's demographics and culture . Honduras is known for its rich natural resources , including minerals , coffee , tropical fruit , and sugar cane , as well as for its growing textiles industry , which serves the international market .
==Etymology==
The literal meaning of the term `` Honduras '' is `` depths '' in Spanish . The name could either refer to the bay of Trujillo as an anchorage , fondura in the Leonese dialect of Spain , or to Christopher Columbus 's alleged quote that `` Gracias a Dios que hemos salido de esas Honduras '' ( `` Thank God we have departed from those depths '' ) .
It was not until the end of the 16th century that Honduras was used for the whole province . Prior to 1580 , Honduras referred to only the eastern part of the province , and Higueras referred to the western part . Another early name is Guaimura , revived as the name for the Guaymuras dialogue that took place in Honduras as opposed to Costa Rica .
Hondurans are often referred to as Catracho or Catracha ( fem ) in Spanish . The word was coined by Nicaraguans and derives from the last name of the Spanish Honduran General Florencio Xatruch , who in 1857 led Honduran armed forces against an attempted invasion by North American adventurer William Walker ( filibuster ) . The nickname is considered complimentary , not derogatory .
==History==
===Pre-colonial period===
In the pre-Columbian era , modern Honduras was split between two pan-cultural regions : Mesoamerica in the west and the Isthmo-Colombian area in the east . Each complex had a `` core area '' within Honduras ( the Sula Valley for Mesoamerica , and La Mosquitia ( Honduras ) for the Isthmo-Colombian area ) , and the intervening area was one of gradual transition . However , these concepts had no meaning in the Pre-Columbian era itself and represent extremely diverse areas . The Lenca of the interior highlands are also generally considered to be culturally Mesoamerican , though the extent of linkage with other areas varied over time ( for example , expanding during the zenith of the Toltec Empire ) .
In the extreme west , Maya civilization flourished for hundreds of years . The dominant , best known , and best studied state within Honduras ' borders was in Copn , which was located in a mainly non-Maya area , or on the frontier between Maya and non-Maya areas . Copn declined with other Lowland centres during the conflagrations of the Classic Maya collapse in the 9th century . The Maya of this civilization survive in western Honduras as the Ch'orti ' people Ch'orti ' , isolated from their Choltian linguistic peers to the west .
However , Copn represents only a fraction of Honduran pre-Columbian history . Remnants of other civilizations are found throughout the country . Archaeologists have studied sites such as and La Sierra in the Naco Valley , Los Naranjos , Honduras on Lake Yojoa , Yarumela in the Comayagua Valley , La Ceiba and Salitron Viejo ( both now under the El Cajn Dam ( Honduras ) reservoir ) , Selin Farm and Cuyamel in the Aguan valley , Cerro Palenque , Travesia , Curruste , Ticamaya , Despoloncal , and Playa de los Muertos in the lower Ula River valley , and many others .
In 2012 , LiDAR scanning revealed that several previously unknown high density settlements existed in La Mosquitia , corresponding to the legend of `` La Ciudad Blanca '' . Excavation and study has since improved knowledge of the region 's history . It is estimated that these settlements reached their zenith from 500 to 1000 AD .
=== Spanish conquest ( 15241539 ) ===
On his fourth and the final voyage to the New World in 1502 , Christopher Columbus landed near the modern town of Trujillo , Honduras , near Guaimoreto Lagoon , becoming the first European to visit the Bay Islands Department on the coast of Honduras . On 30 July 1502 , Columbus sent his brother Bartholomew Columbus to explore the islands and Bartholomew encountered a Mayan trading vessel from Yucatn , carrying well-dressed Maya and a rich cargo . Bartholomew 's men stole the cargo they wanted and kidnapped the ship 's elderly captain to serve as an interpreter in the first recorded encounter between the Spanish and the Maya .
In March 1524 , Gil Gonzlez Dvila became the first Spaniard to enter Honduras as a conquistador . followed by Hernn Corts , who had brought forces down from Mexico . Much of the conquest took place in the following two decades , first by groups loyal to Cristbal de Olid , and then by those loyal to Francisco de Montejo but most particularly by those following Alvarado . In addition to Spanish resources , the conquerors relied heavily on armed forces from MexicoTlaxcalans and Aztec armies of thousands who remained garrisoned in the region .
Resistance to conquest was led in particular by Lempira ( Lenca ruler ) . Many regions in the north of Honduras never fell to the Spanish , notably the Mosquito Coast . After the Spanish conquest , Honduras became part of Spain 's vast empire in the New World within the Captaincy General of Guatemala . Trujillo and Gracias a Dios Department were the first city-capitals . The Spanish ruled the region for approximately three centuries .
===Spanish Honduras ( 15241821 ) ===
Honduras was organized as a province of the Captaincy General of Guatemala and the capital was fixed , first at Trujillo on the Atlantic coast , and later at Comayagua , and finally at Tegucigalpa in the central part of the country .
Silver mining was a key factor in the Spanish conquest and settlement of Honduras . Initially the mines were worked by local people through the encomienda system , but as disease and resistance made this option less available , slaves from other parts of Central America were brought in . When local slave trading stopped at the end of the sixteenth century , African slaves , mostly from Angola , were imported . After about 1650 , very few slaves or other outside workers arrived in Honduras .
Although the Spanish conquered the southern or Pacific portion of Honduras fairly quickly , they were less successful on the northern , or Atlantic side . They managed to found a few towns along the coast , at Puerto Corts and Trujillo in particular , but failed to conquer the eastern portion of the region and many pockets of independent indigenous people as well . The Mosquito Coast in the northeast was particularly effective at resisting conquest . The Miskito Kingdom found support from northern European privateers , pirates and especially the British formerly English colony of Jamaica , which placed much of the area under its protection after 1740.
===Independence ( 1821 ) ===
Honduras gained independence from Spain in 1821 and was a part of the First Mexican Empire until 1823 , when it became part of the United Provinces of Central America . It has been an independent republic and has held regular elections since 1838 . In the 1840s and 1850s Honduras participated in several failed attempts at Central American unity , such as the Confederation of Central America ( 18421845 ) , the covenant of Guatemala ( 1842 ) , the Diet of Sonsonate ( 1846 ) , the Diet of Nacaome ( 1847 ) and National Representation in Central America ( 18491852 ) . Although Honduras eventually adopted the name Republic of Honduras , the unionist ideal never waned , and Honduras was one of the Central American countries that pushed the hardest for a policy of regional unity .
Policies favoring international trade and investment began in the 1870s , and soon foreign interests became involved , first in shipping from the north coast , especially tropical fruit and most notably bananas , and then in building railroads . In 1888 , a projected railroad line from the Caribbean coast to the capital , Tegucigalpa , ran out of money when it reached San Pedro Sula . As a result , San Pedro grew into the nation 's primary industrial center and second-largest city . Comayagua was the capital of Honduras until 1880 , when the capital moved to Tegucigalpa .
Since independence , nearly 300 small internal rebellions and civil wars have occurred in the country , including some changes of rgime .
===20th century and the role of American companies===
In the late nineteenth century , Honduras granted land and substantial exemptions to several US-based fruit and infrastructure companies in return for developing the country 's northern regions . Thousands of workers came to the north coast as a result to work in Banana production in Honduras and other businesses that grew up around the export industry . Banana-exporting companies , dominated until 1930 by the Cuyamel Fruit Company , as well as the United Fruit Company , and Standard Fruit Company , built an enclave economy in northern Honduras , controlling infrastructure and creating self-sufficient , tax-exempt sectors that contributed relatively little to economic growth . American troops landed in Honduras in 1903 , 1907 , 1911 , 1912 , 1919 , 1924 and 1925.
In 1904 , the writer O. Henry coined the term `` banana republic '' to describe Honduras , publishing a book called Cabbages and Kings ( literature ) , about a fictional country , Anchuria , inspired by his experiences in Honduras , where he had lived for six months . In The Admiral , O.Henry refers to the nation as a `` small maritime banana republic '' ; naturally , the fruit was the entire basis of its economy . According to a literary analyst writing for The Economist , `` his phrase neatly conjures up the image of a tropical , agrarian country . But its real meaning is sharper : it refers to the fruit companies from the United States that came to exert extraordinary influence over the politics of Honduras and its neighbors . '' In addition to drawing Central American workers north , the fruit companies encouraged immigration of workers from the English-speaking Caribbean , notably Jamaica and Belize , which introduced an African-descended , English-speaking and largely Protestant population into the country , although many of these workers left following changes to immigration law in 1939.
Honduras joined the Allies of World War II after attack on Pearl Harbor , on 8 December 1941 , and signed the Declaration by United Nations on 1 January 1942 , along with twenty-five other governments .
Constitutional crises in the 1940s led to reforms in the 1950s . One reform gave workers permission to organize , and a 1954 General strike of 1954 ( Honduras ) paralyzed the northern part of the country for more than two months , but led to reforms . In 1963 a 1963 Honduran coup d'tat unseated democratically elected President Ramn Villeda Morales . In 1960 , the northern part of what was the Mosquito Coast was transferred from Nicaragua to Honduras by the International Court of Justice .
===War and upheaval , 19691999===
In 1969 , Honduras and El Salvador fought what became known as the Football War . Border tensions led to acrimony between the two countries after Oswaldo Lpez Arellano , the president of Honduras , blamed the deteriorating Honduran economy on immigrants from El Salvador . The relationship reached a low when El Salvador met Honduras for a three-round football elimination match preliminary to the FIFA World Cup .
Tensions escalated and on 14 July 1969 , the Salvadoran army invaded Honduras . The Organization of American States ( OAS ) negotiated a cease-fire which took effect on 20 July and brought about a withdrawal of Salvadoran troops in early August . Contributing factors to the conflict were a boundary dispute and the presence of thousands of Salvadorans living in Honduras illegally . After the week-long war , as many as 130,000 Salvadoran immigrants were expelled .
Hurricane Fifi caused severe damage when it skimmed the northern coast of Honduras on 18 and 19 September 1974 . Juan Alberto Melgar Castro ( 197578 ) and Paz Garcia ( 197882 ) largely built the current physical infrastructure and telecommunications system of Honduras .
In 1979 , the country returned to civilian rule . A constituent assembly was popularly elected in April 1980 to write a new constitution , and general elections were held in November 1981 . The constitution was approved in 1982 and the Liberal Party of Honduras government of Roberto Suazo Crdova won the election with a promise to carry out an ambitious program of economic and social development to tackle the recession in which Honduras found itself . He launched ambitious social and economic development projects sponsored by American development aid . Honduras became host to the largest Peace Corps mission in the world , and nongovernmental and international voluntary agencies proliferated . The Peace Corps withdrew its volunteers in 2012 , citing safety concerns .
During the early 1980s , the United States established a continuing military presence in Honduras to support El Salvador , the Contra ( guerrillas ) guerrillas fighting the Nicaraguan government , and also develop an airstrip and modern port in Honduras . Though spared the bloody civil wars wracking its neighbors , the Honduran army quietly waged campaigns against MarxistLeninist militias such as the People 's Liberation Movement-Chinchoneros Popular Liberation Movement , notorious for kidnappings and bombings , and against many non-militants as well . The operation included a CIA-backed campaign of extrajudicial killings by government-backed units , most notably Battalion 3-16 ( Honduras ) .
In 1998 , Hurricane Mitch caused massive and widespread destruction . Honduran President Carlos Roberto Flores said that fifty years of progress in the country had been reversed . Mitch destroyed about 70 % of the country 's crops and an estimated 7080 % of the transportation infrastructure , including nearly all bridges and secondary roads . Across Honduras 33,000 houses were destroyed , and an additional 50,000 damaged . Some 5,000 people killed , and 12,000 more injured . Total losses were estimated at US $ 3 billion .
===21st century===
In 2007 , President of Honduras Manuel Zelaya and President of the United States George W. Bush began talks on US assistance to Honduras to tackle the latter 's growing drug cartels in Mosquito , Eastern Honduras using US Special Forces . This marked the beginning of a new foothold for the US Military 's continued presence in Central America .
Under Zelaya , Honduras joined ALBA in 2008 , but withdrew in 2010 after the 2009 Honduran coup d'tat . In 2009 , a 2009 Honduran political crisis resulted when power was transferred in a coup from the president to the head of Congress . The OAS suspended Honduras because it did not regard its government as legitimate .
Countries around the world , the Organization of American States , and the United Nations formally and unanimously condemned the action as a coup d'tat , refusing to recognize the de facto government , even though the lawyers consulted by the Library of Congress submitted to the United States Congress an opinion that declared the coup legal . The Honduran Supreme Court also ruled that the proceedings had been legal . The government that followed the de facto government established a truth and reconciliation commission , Comisin de la Verdad y Reconciliacin , which after more than a year of research and debate concluded that the ousting had been a coup d'tat , and illegal in the commission 's opinion .
==Geography==
The north coast of Honduras borders the Caribbean Sea and the Pacific Ocean lies south through the Gulf of Fonseca . Honduras consists mainly of mountains , with narrow plains along the coasts . A large undeveloped lowland jungle , La Mosquitia ( Honduras ) lies in the northeast , and the heavily populated lowland Sula valley in the northwest . In La Mosquitia lies the UNESCO world-heritage site Ro Pltano Biosphere Reserve , with the Coco River which divides Honduras from Nicaragua .
The Islas de la Baha and the Swan Islands , Honduras are off the north coast . Misteriosa Bank and Rosario Bank , north of the Swan Islands , fall within the Exclusive Economic Zone ( EEZ ) of Honduras .
Natural resources include timber , gold , silver , copper , lead , zinc , iron ore , antimony , coal , fish , shrimp , and [
=== Climate ===
The climate varies from tropical in the lowland ] s to [ [ temperate in the mountains . The central and southern regions are relatively hotter and less humid than the northern coast .
===Ecology===
The region is considered a biodiversity hotspot because of the many plant and animal species found there . Like other countries in the region , it contains vast biological resources . Honduras hosts more than 6,000 species of vascular plants , of which 630 ( described so far ) are orchids ; around 250 reptiles and amphibians , more than 700 bird species , and 110 mammalian species , of which half are bats .
In the northeastern region of La Mosquitia ( Honduras ) lies the Ro Pltano Biosphere Reserve , a lowland rainforest which is home to a great diversity of life . The reserve was added to the UNESCO World Heritage Sites List in 1982.
Honduras has rain forests , cloud forests ( which can rise up to nearly above sea level ) , mangroves , savannas and mountain ranges with pine and oak trees , and the Mesoamerican Barrier Reef System . In the Bay Islands ( department ) there are bottlenose dolphins , manta rays , parrot fish , schools of Acanthurus coeruleus and whale shark .
=== Environmental issues ===
Deforestation resulting from logging is rampant in Olancho Department . The clearing of land for agriculture is prevalent in the largely undeveloped La Mosquitia ( Honduras ) region , causing land degradation and soil erosion . Honduras had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 4.48/10 , ranking it 126th globally out of 172 countries .
Lake Yojoa , which is Honduras ' largest source of fresh water , is polluted by [ metals ] produced from mining activities . Some rivers and streams are also polluted by mining .
==Government and politics==
Honduras is governed within a framework of a presidential system representative democracy republic . The President of Honduras is both [ of state ] and [ of government ] . Executive power is exercised by the Politics of Honduras . Legislative power is vested in the National Congress of Honduras . The judiciary is independent of both the executive branch and the legislature .
The National Congress of Honduras ( Congreso Nacional ) has 128 members ( diputados ) , elected for a four-year term by proportional representation . Congressional seats are assigned the parties ' candidates on a Departments of Honduras in proportion to the number of votes each party receives .
=== Political culture ===
In 1963 , a military coup removed the democratically elected president , Ramn Villeda Morales . A string of authoritarian Military junta held power uninterrupted until 1981 , when Roberto Suazo Crdova was elected president .
The party system was dominated by the conservative National Party of Honduras ( Partido Nacional de Honduras : PNH ) and the liberal Liberal Party of Honduras ( Partido Liberal de Honduras : PLH ) until the 2009 Honduran coup d'tat removed Manuel Zelaya from office and put Roberto Micheletti in his place .
In late 2012 , 1540 persons were interviewed by Radio Progreso & ERIC-SJ in collaboration with the Jesuit Central American University , as reported by Associated Press . This survey found that 60.3 % believed the police were involved in crime , 44.9 % had `` no confidence '' in the Supreme Court , and 72 % thought there was electoral fraud in the primary elections of November 2012 . Also , 56 % expected the presidential , legislative and municipal elections of 2013 to be fraudulent .
Current Honduran president Juan Orlando Hernndez took office on 27 January 2014 . After managing to stand for a second term , a very close election in 2017 left uncertainty as to whether Hernandez or his main challenger , television personality Salvador Nasralla , had prevailed .
=== Foreign relations ===
Honduras and Nicaragua had tense relations throughout 2000 and early 2001 due to a boundary dispute off the Atlantic coast . Nicaragua imposed a 35 % tariff against Honduran goods due to the dispute .
In June 2009 a coup d'tat ousted President Manuel Zelaya ; he was taken in a military aircraft to Costa Rica . The General Assembly of the United Nations voted to denounce the coup and called for the restoration of Zelaya . Several Latin American nations , including Mexico , temporarily severed diplomatic relations with Honduras . In July 2010 , full diplomatic relations were once again re-established with Mexico . The United States sent out mixed messages after the coup ; Obama called the ouster a coup and expressed support for Zelaya 's return to power . US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton , advised by John Negroponte , the former Reagan-era Ambassador to Honduras implicated in the IranContra affair , refrained from expressing support . She has since explained that the US would have had to cut aid if it called Zelaya 's ouster a military coup , although the US has a record of ignoring these events when it chooses . Zelaya had expressed an interest in Hugo Chvez ' ALBA ( ALBA ) , and had actually joined in 2008 . After the 2009 coup , Honduras withdrew its membership .
This interest in regional agreements may have increased the alarm of establishment politicians . When Zelaya began calling for a `` fourth ballot box '' to determine whether Hondurans wished to convoke a special constitutional congress , this sounded a lot to some like the constitutional amendments that had extended the terms of both Hugo Chvez and Evo Morales . `` Chvez has served as a role model for like-minded leaders intent on cementing their power . These presidents are barely in office when they typically convene a constitutional convention to guarantee their reelection , '' said a 2009 Spiegel International analysis , which noted that one reason to join ALBA was discounted Venezuelan oil . In addition to Chvez and Morales , Carlos Menem of Argentina , Fernando Henrique Cardoso of Brazil and Columbian President lvaro Uribe had all taken this step , and Washington and the EU were both accusing the Sandinista National Liberation Front government in Nicaragua of tampering with election results . Politicians of all stripes expressed opposition to Zelaya 's referendum proposal , and the Attorney-General accused him of violating the constitution . The Honduran Supreme Court agreed , saying that the constitution had put the Supreme Electoral Tribunal ( Honduras ) in charge of elections and referenda , not the National Statistics Institute , which Zelaya had proposed to have run the count . Whether or not Zelaya 's removal from power had constitutional elements , the Honduran constitution explicitly protects all Hondurans from forced expulsion from Honduras .
The United States maintains a small military presence at one Honduran base . The two countries conduct joint peacekeeping , counter-narcotics , humanitarian , disaster relief , humanitarian , medical and civic action exercises . U.S. troops conduct and provide logistics support for a variety of bilateral and multilateral exercises . The United States is Honduras ' chief trading partner .
=== Military ===
Honduras has a military with the Honduran Army , Honduran Navy and Honduran Air Force .
In 2017 , Honduras signed the UN treaty on the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons .
===Administrative divisions===
Honduras is divided into 18 Departments of Honduras . The capital city is Tegucigalpa in the Central District within the department of Francisco Morazn .
# Atlntida Department
# Choluteca Department
# Coln Department ( Honduras )
# Comayagua Department
# Copn Department
# Corts Department
# El Paraso Department
# Francisco Morazn Department
# Gracias a Dios Department
# Intibuc Department
# Bay Islands Department
# La Paz Department ( Honduras )
# Lempira Department
# Ocotepeque Department
# Olancho Department
# Santa Brbara Department , Honduras
# Valle Department
# Yoro Department
A new administrative division called Zone for Employment and Economic Development ( Honduras ) ( Zonas de empleo y desarrollo econmico ) was created in 2013 . ZEDEs have a high level of autonomy with their own political system at a judicial , economic and administrative level , and are based on free market capitalism .
==Economy==
=== Poverty ===
The World Bank categorizes Honduras as a low middle-income nation . The nation 's per capita income sits at around 600 US dollars making it one of the lowest in North America .
In 2010 , 50 % of the population were living below the poverty threshold . By 2016 more than 66 % were living below the poverty line .
Economic growth in the last few years has averaged 7 % a year , one of the highest rates in Latin America ( 2010 ) . Despite this , Honduras has seen the least development amongst all Central American countries . Honduras is ranked 130 of 188 countries with a Human Development Index of .625 that classifies the nation as having medium development ( 2015 ) . The three factors that go into Honduras ' HDI ( an extended and healthy life , accessibility of knowledge and standard of living ) have all improved since 1990 but still remain relatively low with life expectancy at birth being 73.3 , expected years of schooling being 11.2 ( mean of 6.2 years ) and GNP per capita being $ 4,466 ( 2015 ) . The HDI for Latin America and the Caribbean overall is 0.751 with life expectancy at birth being 68.6 , expected years of schooling being 11.5 ( mean of 6.6 ) and GNI per capita being $ 6,281 ( 2015 ) .
The 2009 Honduran coup d'tat led to a variety of economic trends in the nation . Overall growth has slowed , averaging 5.7 percent from 2006 to 2008 but slowing to 3.5 percent annually between 2010 and 2013 . Following the coup trends of decreasing poverty and extreme poverty were reversed . The nation saw a poverty increase of 13.2 percent and in extreme poverty of 26.3 percent in just 3 years . Furthermore , unemployment grew between 2008 and 2012 from 6.8 percent to 14.1 percent .
Because much of the Honduran economy is based on small scale agriculture of only a few exports , natural disasters have a particularly devastating impact . Natural disasters , such as Hurricane Mitch , have contributed to this inequality as they particularly affect poor rural areas . Additionally , they are a large contributor to food insecurity in the country as farmers are left unable to provide for their families . A study done by Honduras NGO , World Neighbors , determined the terms `` increased workload , decreased basic grains , expensive food , and fear '' were most associated with Hurricane Mitch .
The rural and urban poor were hit hardest by Hurricane Mitch . Those in southern and western regions specifically were considered most vulnerable as they both were subject to environmental destruction and home to many subsistence farmers . Due to disasters such as Hurricane Mitch , the agricultural economic sector has declined a third in the past twenty years . This is mostly due to a decline in exports , such as bananas and coffee , that were affected by factors such as natural disasters . Indigenous communities along the Patuca River were hit extremely hard as well . The mid-Pataca region was almost completely destroyed . Over 80 % of rice harvest and all of banana , plantain , and manioc harvests were lost . Relief and reconstruction efforts following the storm were partial and incomplete , reinforcing existing levels of poverty rather than reversing those levels , especially for indigenous communities . The period between the end of food donations and the following harvest led to extreme hunger , causing deaths amongst the Tawahka population . Those that were considered the most `` land-rich '' lost 36 % of their total land on average . Those that were the most `` land-poor '' , lost less total land but a greater share of their overall total . This meant that those hit hardest were single women as they constitute the majority of this population .
=== Poverty reduction strategies ===
Since the 1970s when Honduras was designated a `` food priority country '' by the UN , organizations such as The World Food Program ( WFP ) have worked to decrease malnutrition and food insecurity . A large majority of Honduran farmers live in extreme poverty , or below 180 US dollars per capita . Currently one fourth of children are affected by chronic malnutrition . WFP is currently working with the Honduran government on a School Feeding Program which provides meals for 21,000 Honduran schools , reaching 1.4 million school children . WFP also participates in disaster relief through reparations and emergency response in order to aid in quick recovery that tackles the effects of natural disasters on agricultural production .
Honduras ' Poverty Reduction Strategy in Honduras was implemented in 1999 and aimed to cut extreme poverty in half by 2015 . While spending on poverty-reduction aid increased there was only a 2.5 % increase in GDP between 1999 and 2002 . This improvement left Honduras still below that of countries that lacked aid through Poverty Reduction Strategy behind those without it . The World Bank believes that this inefficiency stems from a lack of focus on infrastructure and rural development . Extreme poverty saw a low of 36.2 percent only two years after the implementation of the strategy but then increased to 66.5 percent by 2012.
Poverty Reduction Strategies were also intended to affect social policy through increased investment in education and health sectors . This was expected to lift poor communities out of poverty while also increasing the workforce as a means of stimulating the Honduran economy . Conditional cash transfers were used to do this by the Family Assistance Program . This program was restructured in 1998 in an attempt to increase effectiveness of cash transfers for health and education specifically for those in extreme poverty . Overall spending within Poverty Reduction Strategies have been focused on education and health sectors increasing social spending from 44 % of Honduras ' GDP in 2000 to 51 % in 2004.
Critics of aid from International Finance Institutions believe that the World Bank 's Poverty Reduction Strategy result in little substantive change to Honduran policy . Poverty Reduction Strategies also excluded clear priorities , specific intervention strategy , strong commitment to the strategy and more effective macro-level economic reforms according to Jose Cuesta of Cambridge University . Due to this he believes that the strategy did not provide a pathway for economic development that could lift Honduras out of poverty resulting in neither lasting economic growth of poverty reduction .
Prior to its 2009 2009 Honduran coup d'tat Honduras widely expanded social spending and an extreme increase in minimum wage . Efforts to decrease inequality were swiftly reversed following the coup . When Zelaya was removed from office social spending as a percent of GDP decreased from 13.3 percent in 2009 to 10.9 recent in 2012 . This decrease in social spending exacerbated the effects of the recession , which the nation was previously relatively well equipped to deal with .
The World Bank Group Group Executive Board approved a plan known as the new Country Partnership Framework ( CPF ) . This plan 's objectives are to expand social program coverage , strengthen infrastructure , increase financing accessibility , strengthen regulatory framework and institutional capacity , improve the productivity of rural areas , strengthen natural disaster and climate change resiliency , and the buildup local governments so that violence and crime rates will decrease . The overall aim of the initiative is to decrease inequality and vulnerability of certain populations while increasing economic growth . Additionally the signing of the U.S.Central America Free Trade Agreement ( CAFTA ) was meant to diversify the economy in order to promote growth and expand the range of exports the country is reliant on .
===Economic inequality===
Levels of income inequality in Honduras are higher than in any other Latin American country . Unlike other Latin American countries , inequality steadily increased in Honduras between 1991 and 2005 . Between 2006 and 2010 inequality saw a decrease but increased again in 2010.
When Honduras ' Human Development Index is adjusted for inequality ( known as the IHDI ) Honduras ' development index is reduced to .443 . The levels of inequality in each aspect of development can also be assessed . In 2015 inequality of life expectancy at birth was 19.6 % , inequality in education was 24.4 % and inequality in income was 41.5 % The overall loss in human development due to inequality was 29.2.
The IHDI for Latin America and the Caribbean overall is 0.575 with an overall loss of 23.4 % . In 2015 for the entire region , inequality of life expectancy at birth was 22.9 % , inequality in education was 14.0 % and inequality in income was 34.9 % . While Honduras has a higher life expectancy than other countries in the region ( before and after inequality adjustments ) , its quality of education and economic standard of living are lower . Income inequality and education inequality have a large impact on the overall development of the nation .
Inequality also exists between rural and urban areas as it relates to the distribution of resources . Poverty is concentrated in southern , eastern , and western regions where rural and indigenous peoples live . North and central Honduras are home to the country 's industries and infrastructure , resulting in low levels of poverty . Poverty is concentrated in rural Honduras , a pattern that is reflected throughout Latin America . The effects of poverty on rural communities are vast . Poor communities typically live in adobe homes , lack material resources , have limited access to medical resources , and live off of basics such as rice , maize and beans .
The lower class predominantly consists of rural subsistence farmers and landless peasants . Since 1965 there has been an increase in the number of landless peasants in Honduras which has led to a growing class of urban poor individuals . These individuals often migrate to urban centers in search of work in the service sector , manufacturing , or construction . Demographers believe that without social and economic reform , rural to urban migration will increase , resulting in the expansion of urban centers . Within the lower class , underemployment is a major issue . Individuals that are underemployed often only work as part-time laborers on seasonal farms meaning their annual income remains low . In the 1980s peasant organizations and labor unions such as the National Federation of Honduran Peasants , The National Association of Honduran Peasants and the National Union of Peasants formed .
It is not uncommon for rural individuals to voluntarily enlist in the military , however this often does not offer stable or promising career opportunities . The majority of high-ranking officials in the Honduran army are recruited from elite military academies . Additionally , the majority of enlistment in the military is forced . Forced recruitment largely relies on an alliance between the Honduran government , military and upper class Honduran society . In urban areas males are often sought out from secondary schools while in rural areas roadblocks aided the military in handpicking recruits . Higher socio-economic status enables individuals to more easily evade the draft .
Middle class Honduras is a small group defines by relatively low membership and income levels . Movement from lower to middle class is typically facilitated by higher education . Professionals , students , farmers , merchants , business employees , and civil servants are all considered a part of the Honduran middle class . Opportunities for employment and the industrial and commercial sectors are slow growing , limiting middle class membership .
The Honduran upper class has much higher income levels than the rest of the Honduran population reflecting large amounts of income inequality . Much of the upper class affords their success to the growth of cotton and livestock exports post-World War II . The wealthy are not politically unified and differ in political and economic views .
=== Trade ===
The currency is the Honduran lempira .
The government operates both the electrical grid , Empresa Nacional de Energa Elctrica ( ENEE ) and the land-line telephone service , Hondutel . ENEE receives heavy subsidies to counter its chronic financial problems , but Hondutel is no longer a monopoly . The telecommunication sector was opened to private investment on 25 December 2005 , as required under CAFTA . The price of petroleum is regulated , and the National Congress of Honduras often ratifies temporary price regulation for basic commodities .
Gold , silver , lead and zinc are mined .
In 2005 Honduras signed CAFTA , a free trade agreement with the United States . In December 2005 , Puerto Corts , the primary seaport of Honduras , was included in the U.S. Container Security Initiative .
In 2006 the U.S. Department of Homeland Security and the United States Department of Energy announced the first phase of the Secure Freight Initiative ( SFI ) , which built upon existing port security measures . SFI gave the U.S. government enhanced authority , allowing it to scan containers from overseas for nuclear and radiological materials in order to improve the risk assessment of individual US-bound containers . The initial phase of Secure Freight involved deploying of nuclear detection and other devices to six foreign ports :
* Port Qasim in Pakistan ;
* Puerto Corts in Honduras ;
* Southampton in the United Kingdom ;
* Port of Salalah in Oman ;
* Port of Singapore ;
* Gamman Terminal at Port of Busan , Korea .
Containers in these ports have been scanned since 2007 for radiation and other risk factors before they are allowed to depart for the United States .
For economic development a 2012 memorandum of understanding with a group of international investors obtained Honduran government approval to build a zone ( city ) with its own laws , tax system , judiciary and police , but opponents brought a suit against it in the Supreme Court , calling it a `` state within a state '' . In 2013 , Honduras ' Congress ratified Decree 120 , which led to the establishment of Zone for Employment and Economic Development ( Honduras ) . The government began construction of the first zones in June 2015.
===Energy===
About half of the electricity sector in Honduras is privately owned . The remaining electricity generation capacity is run by ENEE ( Empresa Nacional de Energa Elctrica ) .
Key challenges in the sector are :
* Financing investments in generation and transmission without either a financially healthy utility or concessionary funds from external donors
* Re-balancing tariffs , cutting arrears and reducing losses , including electricity theft , without social unrest
* Reconciling environmental concerns with government objectives  two large new dams and associated hydropower plants .
* Improving access to electricity in rural areas .
===Transportation===
Infrastructure for transportation in Honduras consists of : Rail transport in Honduras ; of roadways ; six ports ; and 112 airports altogether ( 12 Paved , 100 unpaved ) . The Ministry of Public Works , Transport and Housing ( SOPRTRAVI in Spanish acronym ) is responsible for transport sector policy .
===Water supply and sanitation===
Water supply and sanitation in Honduras differ greatly from urban centers to rural villages . Larger population centers generally have modernized water treatment and distribution systems , but water quality is often poor because of lack of proper maintenance and treatment . Rural areas generally have basic drinking water systems with limited capacity for water treatment . Many urban areas have sewer systems in place to collect wastewater , but proper treatment of wastewater is rare . In rural areas sanitary facilities are generally limited to latrines and basic septic pits .
Water and sanitation services were historically provided by the ( SANAA ) . In 2003 , the government enacted a new `` water law '' which called for the decentralization of water services . Under the 2003 law , local communities have both the right and the responsibility to own , operate , and control their own drinking water and wastewater systems . Since this law passed , many communities have joined together to address water and sanitation issues on a regional basis .
Many national and international non-government organizations have a history of working on water and sanitation projects in Honduras . International groups include the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement , Water 1st International , Rotary International , Catholic Relief Services , Water for People , EcoLogic Development Fund , CARE ( relief ) , the Canadian Executive Service Organization ( CESO-SACO ) , Engineers Without Borders  USA , Flood The Nations , Students Helping Honduras ( SHH ) , Global Brigades , and Agua para el Pueblo in partnership with AguaClara at Cornell University .
In addition , many government organizations work on projects in Honduras , including the European Union , the United States Agency for International Development , the United States Army Corps of Engineers , Cooperacion Andalucia , the government of Japan , and others .
==Crime==
In recent years Honduras has experienced very high levels of violence and criminality . Homicide violence reached a peak in 2012 with an average of 20 homicides a day . Cities such as San Pedro Sula and the Tegucigalpa have registered homicide rates among the highest in the world . The violence is associated with Illegal drug trade as Honduras is often a transit point , and with a number of urban gangs , mainly the MS-13 and the 18th Street gang . But as recently as 2017 , organizations such as InSight Crime 's show figures of 42 per 100,000 inhabitants ; a 26 % drop from 2016 figures .
Violence in Honduras increased after Plan Colombia was implemented and after President of Mexico Felipe Caldern declared the war against drug trafficking in Mexico . Along with neighboring El Salvador and Guatemala , Honduras forms part of the Northern Triangle of Central America , which has been characterized as one of the most violent regions in the world . As a result of crime and increasing murder rates , the flow of migrants from Honduras to the U.S. also went up . The rise in violence in the region has received international attention .
==Demographics==
{ class= '' wikitable '' style= '' float : right ; margin-left : 10px ''
+ Population in Honduras
-
! scope= '' col '' style= '' background : # cfb ; '' Year
! scope= '' col '' style= '' background : # cfb ; '' Million
-
1950 style= '' text-align : right ; '' 1.5
-
2000 style= '' text-align : right ; '' 6.6
-
style= '' text-align : right ; ''
}
Honduras had a population of in . The proportion of the population below the age of 15 in 2010 was 36.8 % , 58.9 % were between 15 and 65 years old , and 4.3 % were 65 years old or older .
Since 1975 , emigration from Honduras has accelerated as economic migrants and political refugees sought a better life elsewhere . A majority of Honduran diaspora live in the United States . A 2012 US State Department estimate suggested that between 800,000 and one million Hondurans lived in the United States at that time , nearly 15 % of the Honduran population . The large uncertainty about numbers is because numerous Hondurans live in the United States without a visa . In the 2010 census in the United States , 617,392 residents identified as Hondurans , up from 217,569 in 2000.
===Race and ethnicity===
The ethnic breakdown of Honduran society was 90 % Mestizo , 7 % American Indian , 2 % Black and 1 % White ( 2017 ) . The 1927 Honduran census provides no racial data but in 1930 five classifications were created : white , Indian , Negro , yellow , and mestizo . This system was used in the 1935 and 1940 census . Mestizo was used to describe individuals that did not fit neatly into the categories of white , Indian , negro or yellow or who are of mixed white-Indian descent .
John Gillin considers Honduras to be one of thirteen `` Mestizo countries '' ( Mexico , Guatemala , El Salvador , Nicaragua , Panama , Colombia , Venezuela , Cuba , Ecuador , Peru , Bolivia , Paraguay ) . He claims that in much as Spanish America little attention is paid to race and race mixture resulting in social status having little reliance on one 's physical features . However , in `` Mestizo countries '' such as Honduras , this is not the case . Social stratification from Spain was able to develop in these countries through colonization .
During colonization the majority of Honduras ' indigenous population died of diseases like smallpox and measles resulting in a more homogenous indigenous population compared to other colonies . Nine indigenous and African American groups are recognized by the government in Honduras . The majority of Amerindians in Honduras are Lenca people , followed by the Miskito , Cho'rti ' , Tolupan , Pech and Sumo . Around 50,000 Lenca individuals live in the west and western interior of Honduras while the other small native groups are located throughout the country .
The majority of blacks in Honduran are culturally Ladino people , meaning they are culturally Hispanic . Non-ladino groups in Honduras include the Black Carib , Miskito people , Arab immigrants and the black population of the Islas de la Baha The Black Carib population descended from freed slaves from Saint Vincent . The Miskito population ( about 10,000 individuals ) are the descendants of African and British immigrants and are extremely racially diverse . While the Black Carib and Miskito populations have similar origins , Black Caribs are considered black while Miskitos are considered indigenous . This is largely a reflection of cultural differences , as Black Caribs have retained much of their original African culture . The majority of Arab Hondurans are of Palestinian and Lebanese descent . They are known as `` turcos '' in Honduras because of migration during the rule of the Ottoman Empire . They have maintained cultural distinctiveness and prospered economically .
===Gender===
The male to female ratio of the Honduran population is 1.01 . This ratio stands at 1.05 at birth , 1.04 from 15 to 24 years old , 1.02 from 25 to 54 years old , .88 from 55 to 64 years old , and .77 for those 65 years or older .
Gender Development Index ( GDI ) was .942 in 2015 with an HDI of .600 for females and .637 for males . Life expectancy at birth for males is 70.9 and 75.9 for females . Expected years of schooling in Honduras is 10.9 years for males ( mean of 6.1 ) and 11.6 for females ( mean of 6.2 ) . These measures do not reveal a large disparity between male and female development levels , however , GNI per capita is vastly different by gender . Males have a GNI per capita of $ 6,254 while that of females is only $ 2,680 . Honduras ' overall GDI is higher than that of other medium HDI nations ( .871 ) but lower than the overall HDI for Latin America and the Caribbean ( .981 ) .
The United Nations Development Program ( UNDP ) ranks Honduras 116th for measures including women 's political power , and female access to resources . Gender Inequality Index ( GII ) depicts gender-based inequalities in Honduras according to reproductive health , empowerment , and economic activity . Honduras has a GII of .461 and ranked 101 of 159 countries in 2015 . 25.8 % of Honduras ' parliament is female and 33.4 % of adult females have a secondary education or higher while only 31.1 % of adult males do . Despite this , while male participation in the labor market is 84.4 , female participation is 47.2 % . Honduras ' Maternal Mortality Ratio is 129 and the adolescent birth rate is 65.0 for women ages 1519 .
Familialism and machismo carry a lot of weight within Honduran society . Familialism refers to the idea of individual interests being second to that of the family , most often in relation to dating and marriage , abstinence , and parental approval and supervision of dating . Aggression and proof of masculinity through physical dominance are characteristic of machismo .
Honduras has historically functioned with a patriarchal system like many other Latin American countries . Honduran men claim responsibility for family decisions including reproductive health decisions . Recently Honduras has seen an increase in challenges to this notion as feminist movements and access to global media increases . There has been an increase in educational attainment , labor force participating , urban migration , late-age marriage , and contraceptive use amongst Honduran women .
Between 1971 and 2001 Honduran total fertility rate decreased from 7.4 births to 4.4 births . This is largely attributable to an increase in educational attainment and workforce participation by women , as well as more widespread use of contraceptives . In 1996 50 % of women were using at least one type of contraceptive . By 2001 62 % were largely due to female sterilization , birth control in the form of a pill , injectable birth control , and IUDs . A study done in 2001 of Honduran men and women reflect conceptualization of reproductive health and decision making in Honduras . 28 % of men and 25 % of women surveyed believed men were responsible for decisions regarding family size and family planning uses . 21 % of men believed men were responsible for both .
Sexual violence against women has proven to be a large issue in Honduras that has caused many to migrate to the U.S . The prevalence of child sexual abuse was 7.8 % in Honduras with the majority of reports being from children under the age of 11 . Women that experienced sexual abuse as children were found to be twice as likely to be in violent relationships . Femicide is widespread in Honduras . In 2014 , 40 % of unaccompanied refugee minors were female . Gangs are largely responsible for sexual violence against women as they often use sexual violence . Between 2005 and 2013 according to the UN Special Repporteur on Violence Against Women , violent deaths increased 263.4 percent . Impunity for sexual violence and femicide crimes was 95 percent in 2014 . Additionally , many girls are forced into human trafficking and prostitution .
Between 1995 and 1997 Honduras recognized domestic violence as both a public health issue and a punishable offense due to efforts by the Pan American Health Organization ( PAHO ) . PAHO 's subcommittee on Women , Health and Development was used as a guide to develop programs that aid in domestic violence prevention and victim assistance programs However , a study done in 2009 showed that while the policy requires health care providers to report cases of sexual violence , emergency contraception , and victim referral to legal institutions and support groups , very few other regulations exist within the realm of registry , examination and follow-up . Unlike other Central American countries such as El Salvador , Guatemala and Nicaragua , Honduras does not have detailed guidelines requiring service providers to be extensively trained and respect the rights of sexual violence victims . Since the study was done the UNFPA and the Health Secretariat of Honduras have worked to develop and implement improved guidelines for handling cases of sexual violence .
An educational program in Honduras known as Sistema de Aprendizaje Tutorial ( SAT ) has attempted to `` undo gender '' through focusing on gender equality in everyday interactions . Honduras ' SAT program is one of the largest in the world , second only to Colombia 's with 6,000 students . It is currently sponsored by Asociacion Bayan , a Honduran NGO , and the Honduran Ministry of Education . It functions by integrating gender into curriculum topics , linking gender to the ideas of justice and equality , encouraging reflection , dialogue and debate and emphasizing the need for individual and social change . This program was found to increase gender consciousness and a desire for gender equality amongst Honduran women through encouraging discourse surrounding existing gender inequality in the Honduran communities .
===Languages===
Spanish language is the official , national language , spoken by virtually all Hondurans . In addition to Spanish , a number of indigenous languages are spoken in some small communities . Other languages spoken by some include Honduran sign language and Bay Islands Creole English .
The main indigenous languages are :
* Garifuna language ( Arawakan languages ) ( almost 100,000 speakers in Honduras including monolinguals )
* Mskito language ( Misumalpan languages ) ( 29,000 speakers in Honduras )
* Sumu language ( Misumalpan languages ) ( less than 1000 speakers in Honduras , more in Nicaragua )
* Pech language Pech/Paya , ( Chibchan languages ) ( less than 1000 speakers )
* Jicaque language ( Jicaquean languages ) ( less than 500 speakers )
* Ch'orti ' language Ch'orti ' ( Mayan languages ) ( less than 50 speakers )
The Lenca language isolate lost all its fluent native speakers in the 20th century but is currently undergoing revival efforts among the members of the ethnic population of about 100,000 . The largest immigrant languages are Arabic ( 42,000 ) , Armenian ( 1,300 ) , Turkish ( 900 ) , Yue Chinese ( 1,000 ) .
=== Largest cities ===
===Religion===
Although most Hondurans are nominally Roman Catholic ( which would be considered the main religion ) , membership in the Roman Catholic Church is declining while membership in Protestant churches is increasing . The International Religious Freedom Report , 2008 , notes that a CID Gallup poll reported that 51.4 % of the population identified themselves as Catholic , 36.2 % as evangelical Protestant , 1.3 % claiming to be from other religions , including Muslims , Buddhists , Jews , Rastafarians , etc . and 11.1 % do not belong to any religion or unresponsive . 8 % reported as being either atheistic or agnostic . Customary Catholic church tallies and membership estimates 81 % Catholic where the priest ( in more than 185 parishes ) is required to fill out a pastoral account of the parish each year .
The CIA Factbook lists Honduras as 97 % Catholic and 3 % Protestant . Commenting on statistical variations everywhere , John Green of Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life notes that : `` It is n't that ... numbers are more right than [ someone else 's ] numbers ... but how one conceptualizes the group . '' Often people attend one church without giving up their `` home '' church . Many who attend evangelical megachurches in the US , for example , attend more than one church . This shifting and fluidity is common in Brazil where two-fifths of those who were raised evangelical are no longer evangelical and Catholics seem to shift in and out of various churches , often while still remaining Catholic .
Most pollsters suggest an annual poll taken over a number of years would provide the best method of knowing religious demographics and variations in any single country . Still , in Honduras are thriving Anglican , Presbyterian , Methodist , Seventh-day Adventist Church Seventh-day Adventist , Lutheran , The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Latter-day Saint ( Mormonism ) and Pentecostal churches . There are Protestant seminaries . The Catholic Church , still the only `` church '' that is recognized , is also thriving in the number of schools , hospitals , and pastoral institutions ( including its own medical school ) that it operates . Its archbishop , scar Rodrguez Maradiaga , is also very popular , both with the government , other churches , and in his own church . Practitioners of the Buddhism , Jewish , Islamic , Bah Faith , Rastafari movement and indigenous denominations and religions exist .
===Health===
See Health in Honduras
===Education===
About 83.6 % of the population are Literacy and the net primary enrollment rate was 94 % in 2004 . In 2014 , the primary school completion rate was 90.7 % . Honduras has bilingual ( Spanish and English ) and even trilingual ( Spanish with English , Arabic , or German ) List of schools in Honduras and List of universities in Honduras .
The higher education is governed by the National Autonomous University of Honduras which has centers in the most important cities of Honduras .
=== Crime ===
Crime in Honduras is rampant and criminals operate with a high degree of impunity . Honduras has one of the highest murder rates in the world . Official statistics from the Honduran Observatory on National Violence show Honduras ' homicide rate was 60 per 100,000 in 2015 with the majority of homicide cases unprosecuted .
Highway assaults and carjackings at roadblocks or checkpoints set up by criminals with police uniforms and equipment occur frequently . Although reports of kidnappings of foreigners are not common , families of kidnapping victims often pay ransoms without reporting the crime to police out of fear of retribution , so kidnapping figures may be underreported .
Owing to measures taken by government and business in 2014 to improve tourist safety , Roatan and the Bay Islands have lower crime rates than the Honduran mainland .
In the less populated region of Gracias a Dios , narcotics-trafficking is rampant and police presence is scarce . Threats against U.S. citizens by drug traffickers and other criminal organizations have resulted in the U.S. Embassy placing restrictions on the travel of U.S. officials through the region .
==Culture==
===Art===
The most renowned Honduran painter is Jos Antonio Velsquez . Other important painters include Carlos Garay , and Roque Zelaya . Some of Honduras ' most notable writers are Lucila Gamero de Medina , Froyln Turcios , Ramn Amaya Amador and Juan Pablo Suazo Euceda , Marco Antonio Rosa , Roberto Sosa ( poet ) , Eduardo Bhr , Amanda Castro , Javier Abril Espinoza , Tefilo Trejo , and Roberto Quesada .
The Jos Francisco Saybe theater in San Pedro Sula is home to the Crculo Teatral Sampedrano ( Theatrical Circle of San Pedro Sula )
Honduras has experienced a boom from its film industry for the past two decades . Since the premiere of the movie `` Anita la cazadora de insectos '' in 2001 , the level of Honduran productions has increased , many collaborating with countries such as Mexico , Colombia , and the U.S . The most well known Honduran films are `` El Xendra '' , `` Amor y Frijoles '' , and `` Cafe con aroma a mi tierra '' .
=== Cuisine ===
Honduran cuisine is a fusion of indigenous Lenca cuisine , Cuisine of Spain , Caribbean cuisine and African cuisine . There are also dishes from the Garifuna people . Coconut and coconut milk are featured in both sweet and savory dishes . Regional specialties include fried Fish ( food ) , tamales , carne asada and baleadas .
Other popular dishes include : meat roasted with chismol and carne asada , chicken with rice and corn , and fried fish with pickled onions and jalapeos . Some of the ways seafood and some meats are prepared in coastal areas and in the Bay Islands Department involve coconut milk .
The soups Hondurans enjoy include bean soup , mondongo soup ( tripe soup ) , seafood soups and beef soups . Generally these soups are served mixed with plantain ( cooking ) , cassava , and cabbage , and served with Maize tortillas .
Other typical dishes are the montucas or corn tamales , stuffed tortillas , and tamales wrapped in Plantain ( cooking ) leaves . Honduran typical dishes also include an abundant selection of tropical fruits such as papaya , pineapple , plum , sapote , passion fruit and bananas which are prepared in many ways while they are still green .
=== Media ===
At least half of Honduran households have at least one television . Public television has a far smaller role than in most other countries . Honduras ' main newspapers are La Prensa ( Honduras ) , El Heraldo ( Tegucigalpa ) , La Tribuna ( Honduras ) and Diario Tiempo . The official newspaper is .
=== Music ===
Punta is the main music of Honduras , with other sounds such as Caribbean salsa , merengue music , reggae , and reggaeton all widely heard , especially in the north , and Mexican rancheras heard in the rural interior of the country . The most well known musicians are Guillermo Anderson and Polache .
===Celebrations===
Some of Honduras ' national holidays include Honduras Independence Day on 15 September and Children 's Day or Da del Nio , which is celebrated in homes , schools and churches on 10 September ; on this day , children receive presents and have parties similar to Christmas or birthday celebrations . Some neighborhoods have piatas on the street . Other holidays are Easter , Maundy Thursday , Good Friday , Day of the Soldier ( 3 October to celebrate the birth of Francisco Morazn ) , Christmas , El Dia de Lempira ( Lenca ruler ) on 20 July , and New Year 's Eve .
Honduras Independence Day festivities start early in the morning with marching bands . Each band wears different colors and features cheerleaders . Fiesta Catracha takes place this same day : typical Honduran foods such as beans , tamales , baleadas , cassava with chicharrn , and tortillas are offered .
On Christmas Eve people reunite with their families and close friends to have dinner , then give out presents at midnight . In some cities fireworks are seen and heard at midnight . On New Year 's Eve there is food and `` cohetes '' , fireworks and festivities . Birthdays are also great events , and include piatas filled with candies and surprises for the children .
La Ceiba Carnival is celebrated in La Ceiba , a city located in the north coast , in the second half of May to celebrate the day of the city 's patron saint Isidore the Laborer . People from all over the world come for one week of festivities . Every night there is a little carnaval ( carnavalito ) in a neighborhood . On Saturday there is a big parade with floats and displays with people from many countries . This celebration is also accompanied by the Milk Fair , where many Hondurans come to show off their farm products and animals .
===National symbols===
The flag of Honduras is composed of three equal horizontal stripes . The blue upper and lower stripes represent the Pacific Ocean and the Caribbean Sea . The central stripe is white . It contains five blue stars representing the five states of the Federal Republic of Central America . The middle star represents Honduras , located in the center of the Central American Union .
The coat of arms was established in 1945 . It is an equilateral triangle , at the base is a volcano between three castles , over which is a rainbow and the sun shining . The triangle is placed on an area that symbolizes being bathed by both seas . Around all of this an oval containing in golden lettering : `` Republic of Honduras , Free , Sovereign and Independent '' .
The `` National Anthem of Honduras '' is a result of a contest carried out in 1914 during the presidency of Manuel Bonilla . In the end , it was the poet Augusto Coello that ended up writing the anthem , with German-born Honduran composer Carlos Hartling writing the music . The anthem was officially adopted on 15 November 1915 , during the presidency of . The anthem is composed of a choir and seven stroonduran .
The national flower is the famous orchid , Rhyncholaelia digbyana ( formerly known as Brassavola digbyana ) , which replaced the rose in 1969 . The change of the national flower was carried out during the administration of general Oswaldo Lpez Arellano , thinking that Brassavola digbyana `` is an indigenous plant of Honduras ; having this flower exceptional characteristics of beauty , vigor and distinction '' , as the decree dictates it .
The national tree of Honduras was declared in 1928 to be simply `` the Pine that appears symbolically in our Coat of Arms '' ( el Pino que figura simblicamente en nuestro Escudo ) , even though pines comprise a genus and not a species , and even though legally there 's no specification as for what kind of pine should appear in the coat of arms either . Because of its commonality in the country , the Pinus oocarpa species has become since then the species most strongly associated as the national tree , but legally it is not so . Another species associated as the national tree is the Pinus caribaea .
The national mammal is the white-tailed deer ( Odocoileus virginianus ) , which was adopted as a measure to avoid excessive depredation . It is one of two species of deer that live in Honduras .
The national bird of Honduras is the scarlet macaw ( Ara macao ) . This bird was much valued by the pre-Columbian civilizations of Honduras .
===Folklore===
Legends and fairy tales are paramount in Honduran culture . Lluvia de Peces ( Rain of Fish ) is an example of this . The legends of El Cadejo and La Llorona are also popular .
===Sports===
The major sports in Honduras are football , basketball , rugby , volleyball and cycling , with smaller followings for athletics , softball and handball . Information about some of the sports organisations in Honduras are listed below :
* Football in Honduras
* Federacin Nacional Autnoma de Ftbol de Honduras
* Honduras national baseball team
* Honduras national football team
* Honduras national under-20 football team
* Honduras U-17 national football team
* Rugby union in Honduras
==See also==
* Outline of Honduras
* Index of Honduras-related articles
==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* Government of Honduras
* Official Site of the Tourism Institute of Honduras ( English )
* Chief of State and Cabinet Members
* Honduras . The World Factbook . Central Intelligence Agency .
* Honduras at University of Colorado at Boulder Libraries GovPubs
*
* Honduras profile from the BBC News
*
* Honduran Biodiversity Database
* Honduras Tips Travel Info ( English )
* Honduras Weekly
* Travel and Tourism Info on Honduras ( English )
* Humanitarian Aid in Honduras
* Answers.com
* Project Honduras
* Interactive Maps Honduras
* Key Development Forecasts for Honduras from International Futures
Category : Honduras
Category : Countries in Central America
Category : Former Spanish colonies
Category : Member states of the United Nations
Category : Republics
Category : Spanish-speaking countries and territories
Category : States and territories established in 1821
Category:1821 establishments in North America
Category : Countries in North America
Category : Northern Triangle of Central America <article_end> <article_start>  
Antigua and Barbuda ( ; ) is a sovereign state island country in the West Indies in the Americas , lying between the Caribbean Sea and the Atlantic Ocean . It consists of two major islands , Antigua and Barbuda separated by , and smaller islands ( including Great Bird Island , Antigua , Green Island ( Antigua and Barbuda ) , Guiana Island , Long Island ( Antigua and Barbuda ) , Maiden Island ( Antigua and Barbuda ) , Prickly Pear Island , York Island ( Antigua and Barbuda ) , Redonda ) . The permanent population number is about 97,120 ( 2019 est . ) , with 97 % being resident on Antigua . The capital and largest port and city is St. John 's , Antigua and Barbuda St. John 's on Antigua , with Codrington , Antigua and Barbuda being the largest town on Barbuda . Lying near each other , Antigua and Barbuda are in the middle of the Leeward Islands , part of the Lesser Antilles , roughly at 17th parallel north 17N of the equator .
The Antigua was explored by Christopher Columbus in 1493 and named for the Santa Mara La Antigua . Antigua was colonized by Britain in 1632 ; Barbuda island was first colonised in 1678 . Having been part of the British Leeward Islands from 1871 , Antigua and Barbuda joined the West Indies Federation in 1958 . With the breakup of the federation , it became one of the West Indies Associated States in 1967 . Following self-governance in its internal affairs , independence was granted from the United Kingdom on 1 November 1981 . Antigua and Barbuda is a member of the Commonwealth of Nations and Elizabeth II is the country 's queen and [ of state ] .
The economy of Antigua and Barbuda is particularly dependent on tourism , which accounts for 80 % of GDP . Effects of climate change on island nations , Antigua and Barbuda are particularly vulnerable to the effects of climate change , such as sea level rise , and Extreme weather like hurricanes , which have direct impacts on the island through coastal erosion , water scarcity , and other challenges .
== Etymology ==
Antigua is Spanish for `` ancient '' and barbuda is Spanish for `` bearded '' . The island of Antigua was originally called Wadadli by Arawaks and is locally known by that name today ; Island Caribs possibly called Barbuda Wa'omoni . Christopher Columbus , while sailing by in 1493 may have named it Santa Maria la Antigua , after an icon in the Spanish Seville Cathedral . The `` bearded '' of Barbuda is thought to refer either to the male inhabitants of the island , or the bearded fig trees present there .
==History==
===Pre-colonial period===
Antigua was first settled by archaic age hunter-gatherer Amerindians called the Ciboney . Radiocarbon dating has established the earliest settlements started around 3100 BC . They were succeeded by the ceramic age pre-Columbian Arawakan languages-speaking Saladoid people who migrated from the lower Orinoco River . They introduced agriculture , raising , among other crops , the famous Antigua black pineapple ( Ananas comosus ) , maize , sweet potatoes , chili pepper , guava , tobacco , and cotton . Later on the more bellicose Island Caribs also settled the island , possibly by force .
===European arrival and settlement===
Christopher Columbus was the first European to sight the islands in 1493 . The Spanish did not colonise Antigua until after a combination of European and African diseases , malnutrition , and slavery eventually extirpated most of the native population ; smallpox was probably the greatest killer .
The English settled on Antigua in 1632 ; Christopher Codrington settled on Barbuda in 1685 . Tobacco and then sugar was grown , worked by a large population of slaves from West Africa who soon came to vastly outnumber the European settlers .
===Colonial era===
The English maintained control of the islands , repulsing an attempted French attack in 1666 . The brutal conditions endured by the slaves led to revolts in 1701 and 1729 and a planned revolt in 1736 , the latter led by Prince Klaas , though it was discovered before it began and the ringleaders were executed . Slavery was abolished in the British Empire in 1833 , affecting the economy . This was exacerbated by natural disasters such as the 1843 earthquake and the 1847 hurricane . Mining occurred on the isle of Redonda , however this ceased in 1929 and the island has since remained uninhabited .
Part of the Leeward Islands colony , Antigua and Barbuda became part of the short-lived West Indies Federation from 1958 to 1962 . Antigua and Barbuda subsequently became an associated state of the United Kingdom with full internal autonomy on 27 February 1967 . The 1970s were dominated by discussions as to the islands ' future and the rivalry between Vere Bird of the Antigua Labour Party ( ALP ) ( Premier from 1967 to 1971 and 1976 to 1981 ) and the Progressive Labour Movement ( PLM ) of George Walter ( Premier 19711976 ) . Eventually Antigua and Barbuda gained full independence on 1 November 1981 ; Vere Bird became Prime Minister of the new country . The country opted to remain within the Commonwealth of Nations , retaining Queen Elizabeth as Monarchy of Antigua and Barbuda , with the last List of colonial governors and administrators of Antigua # Governors of Antigua and Barbuda ( 19671981 ) , Wilfred Jacobs , as Governor-General of Antigua and Barbuda Governor-General .
===Independence era===
The first two decades of Antigua 's independence were dominated politically by the Bird family and the ALP , with Vere Bird ruling from 1981 to 1994 , followed by his son Lester Bird from 1994 to 2004 . Though providing a degree of political stability , and boosting tourism to the country , the Bird governments were frequently accused of corruption , cronyism and financial malfeasance . Vere Bird Jr. , the elder son , was forced to leave the cabinet in 1990 following a Guns for Antigua in which he was accused of smuggling Israeli weapons to Colombian drug-traffickers . Another son , Ivor Bird , was convicted of selling cocaine in 1995.
In 1995 Hurricane Luis caused severe damage on Barbuda .
The ALP 's dominance of Antiguan politics ended with the 2004 Antiguan general election , which was won by Baldwin Spencer 's United Progressive Party ( Antigua and Barbuda ) ( UPP ) . However the UPP lost the 2014 Antiguan general election , with the ALP returning to power under Gaston Browne .
Most of Barbuda was devastated in early September 2017 by Hurricane Irma , which brought winds with speeds reaching 295 ; km/h ( 185 ; mph ) . The storm damaged or destroyed 95 % of the island 's buildings and infrastructure , leaving Barbuda `` barely habitable '' according to Prime Minister Gaston Browne . Nearly everyone on the island was evacuated to Antigua .
Amidst the following rebuilding efforts on Barbuda that were estimated to cost at least $ 100 million , the government announced plans to revoke a century old law of communal land by allowing residents to buy land ; a move that has been criticised as promoting `` disaster capitalism '' .
==Geography==
Antigua and Barbuda both are generally low-lying islands whose terrain has been influenced more by limestone formations than Volcanism . The highest point on Antigua and Barbuda is Boggy Peak , located in southwestern Antigua , which is the remnant of a volcanic crater rising .
The shorelines of both islands are greatly indented with beaches , lagoons , and natural harbors . The islands are rimmed by reefs and shoals . There are few streams as rainfall is slight . Both islands lack adequate amounts of fresh groundwater .
About south-west of Antigua lies the small , rocky island of Redonda , which is uninhabited .
=== Cities and villages ===
The most populous cities in Antigua and Barbuda are mostly on Antigua , being Saint John 's , Antigua and Barbuda Saint John 's , All Saints , Antigua and Barbuda , Piggotts , and Liberta , Antigua and Barbuda . The most populous city on Barbuda is Codrington , Antigua and Barbuda . It is estimated that 25 % of the population lives in an Urban area , which is much lower than the international average of 55 % .
===Islands===
Antigua and Barbuda is comprised mostly of its two namesake islands , Antigua , and Barbuda , other than that , Antigua and Barbuda 's biggest islands are Guiana Island & Long Island off the coast of Antigua , and Redonda island , which is far from both of the main islands .
=== Climate ===
Rainfall averages per year , with the amount varying widely from season to season . In general the wettest period is between September and November . The islands generally experience low humidity and recurrent droughts . Temperatures average , with a range from to in the winter to from to in the summer and autumn . The coolest period is between December and February .
Hurricanes strike on an average of once a year , including the powerful SaffirSimpson scale # Category 5 Hurricane Irma , on 6 September 2017 , which damaged 95 % of the structures on Barbuda . Some 1,800 people were evacuated to Antigua .
An estimate published by Time ( magazine ) indicated that over $ 100 ; million would be required to rebuild homes and infrastructure . Philmore Mullin , Director of Barbuda 's National Office of Disaster Services , said that `` all critical infrastructure and utilities are non-existent  food supply , medicine , shelter , electricity , water , communications , waste management '' . He summarised the situation as follows : `` Public utilities need to be rebuilt in their entirety ... It is optimistic to think anything can be rebuilt in six months ... In my 25 years in disaster management , I have never seen something like this . ''
=== Environmental issues ===
==Demographics==
===Ethnic groups===
Antigua has a population of , mostly made up of people of West African , British , and Portuguese people descent . The ethnic distribution consists of 91 % Black & Mulatto , 4.4 % mixed race , 1.7 % White , and 2.9 % other ( primarily South Asians and other Asian ) . Most Whites are of British descent . Christian Levantine Arabs , and a small number of Asians and Sephardic Jews make up the remainder of the population .
An increasingly large percentage of the population lives abroad , most notably in the United Kingdom ( Antiguan British ) , United States and Canada . A minority of Antiguan residents are immigrants from other countries , particularly from Dominica , Guyana and Jamaica , and , increasingly , from the Dominican Republic , St. Vincent and the Grenadines and Nigeria . An estimated 4,500 American citizens also make their home in Antigua and Barbuda , making their numbers one of the largest American populations in the English-speaking Eastern Caribbean .
===Languages===
English is the official language . The Barbudan accent is slightly different from the Antiguan .
In the years before Antigua and Barbuda 's independence , Standard English was widely spoken in preference to Antiguan Creole . Generally , the upper and middle classes shun Antiguan Creole . The educational system dissuades the use of Antiguan Creole and instruction is done in Standard ( British ) English .
Many of the words used in the Antiguan dialect are derived from British English as well as African languages . This can be easily seen in phrases such as : `` Ent it ? '' meaning `` Ai n't it ? '' which is itself dialectal and means `` Is n't it ? '' . Common island proverbs can often be traced to Africa .
Spanish is spoken by around 10,000 inhabitants .
===Religion===
A majority ( 77 % ) of Antiguans are Christians , with the Anglicans ( 17.6 % ) being the largest single denomination . Other Christian denominations present are Seventh-day Adventist Church ( 12.4 % ) , Pentecostalism ( 12.2 % ) , Moravian Church ( 8.3 % ) , Roman Catholics
( 8.2 % ) , Methodist Church ( 5.6 % ) , Wesleyan Holiness Church ( 4.5 % ) , Church of God ( Cleveland , Tennessee ) ( 4.1 % ) , Baptists ( 3.6 % ) , Mormonism ( < 1.0 % ) , as well as Jehovah 's Witnesses .
Non-Christian religions practiced in the islands include the Rastafari , Islam , and Bah Faith .
==Governance==
===Political system===
The politics of Antigua and Barbuda take place within a framework of a Unitary state , parliamentary system , representative democracy monarchy , in which the [ of State ] is the monarch who appoints the List of Governors-General of Antigua and Barbuda Governor-General as vice-regal representative . Elizabeth II is the present Queen of Antigua and Barbuda , having served in that position since the islands ' independence from the United Kingdom in 1981 . The Queen is currently represented by Governor-General Rodney Williams ( politician ) . A council of ministers is appointed by the governor general on the advice of the List of Prime Ministers of Antigua and Barbuda , currently Gaston Browne ( 2014 ) . The prime minister is the [ of government ] .
Executive power is exercised by the government while legislative power is vested in both the Forms of government and the two Chambers of Parliament of Antigua and Barbuda . The bicameral Parliament consists of the Senate ( 17 members appointed by members of the government and the Official Opposition party , and approved by the Governor-General ) , and the House of Representatives ( 17 members elected by first past the post ) to serve five-year terms .
The current Leader of Her Majesty 's Loyal Opposition is the United Progressive Party Member of Parliament ( MP ) , the Honourable Baldwin Spencer .
===Elections===
The last elections held were on 12 June 2014 , during which the Antigua Labour Party won 14 seats , and the United Progressive Party ( Antigua and Barbuda ) 3 seats .
Since 1949 , elections have been won by the populism Antigua Labour Party . However , in the Antigua and Barbuda general election , 2004 saw the defeat of the longest-serving elected government in the Caribbean . Prime Minister Lester Bird , who had succeeded his father Vere Cornwall Bird Sr. , and Deputy Robin Yearwood had been in office since 1976.
The elder Bird was Prime Minister from 1981 to 1994 and Chief Minister of Antigua from 1960 to 1981 , except for the 19711976 period when the Progressive Labour Movement ( PLM ) defeated his party . Vere Cornwall Bird , the nation 's first Prime Minister , is credited with having brought Antigua and Barbuda and the Caribbean into a new era of independence .
====Party elections====
Gaston Browne defeated his predecessor Lester Bryant Bird at the Antigua Labour Party 's biennial convention in November 2012 held to elect a political leader and other officers . The party then altered its name from the Antigua Labour Party ( ALP ) to the Antigua and Barbuda Labour Party ( ABLP ) . This was done to officially include the party 's presence on the sister island of Barbuda in its organisation , the only political party on the mainland to have a physical branch in Barbuda .
=== Judiciary ===
The Judicial branch is the Eastern Caribbean Supreme Court ( based in Saint Lucia ; one judge of the Supreme Court is a resident of the islands and presides over the High Court of Justice ) . Antigua is also a member of the Caribbean Court of Justice . The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council serves as its Supreme Court of Appeal .
===Foreign relations===
Antigua and Barbuda is a member of the United Nations , the Bolivarian Alliance for the Americas , the Commonwealth of Nations , the Caribbean Community , the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States , the Organization of American States , the World Trade Organization and the Eastern Caribbean 's Regional Security System .
Antigua and Barbuda is also a member of the International Criminal Court ( with a Bilateral Immunity Agreement of Protection for the US military as covered under Article 98 of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court ) .
In 2013 , Antigua and Barbuda called for reparations for slavery at the United Nations . Prime Minister Baldwin Spencer said `` We have recently seen a number of leaders apologising '' , and that they should now `` match their words with concrete and material benefits . ''
===Military===
The Royal Antigua and Barbuda Defence Force has around 260 members dispersed between the line infantry regiment , service and support unit and coast guard . There is also the Antigua and Barbuda Cadet Corps made up of 200 teenagers between the ages of 12 to 18.
In 2018 , Antigua and Barbuda signed the UN treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons .
===Administrative divisions===
Antigua and Barbuda is divided into six parishes and two dependencies :
{ style= '' background : none ; ''
* Parishes
* # Saint George Parish , Antigua and Barbuda
* # Saint John Parish , Antigua and Barbuda
* # Saint Mary Parish , Antigua and Barbuda
* # Saint Paul Parish , Antigua and Barbuda
* # Saint Peter Parish , Antigua and Barbuda
* # Saint Philip Parish , Antigua and Barbuda
* Dependencies
* # Barbuda
* # Redonda
style= '' width:400px ; ''
}
Note : Though Barbuda and Redonda are called dependencies they are integral parts of the state , making them essentially administrative divisions . Dependency is simply a title .
===Human rights===
Antigua and Barbuda does not allow discrimination in employment , child labor , Human trafficking , there are laws against Domestic abuse and Child abuse . Although it has not been enforced or a case brought to trial in many years , like other Caribbean islands , LGBT rights in Antigua and Barbuda Same-sex sexual activity is illegal in Antigua and Barbuda and punishable by prison time , though not enforced . There are several current movements under way to repeal the buggery laws .
==Economy==
Tourism dominates the economy , accounting for more than half of the gross domestic product ( GDP ) . Antigua is famous for its many luxury resorts as an ultra-high end travel destination . Weakened tourist activity in the lower and middle market segments since early 2000 has slowed the economy , however , and squeezed the government into a tight fiscal corner .
Investment banking and financial services also make up an important part of the economy . Major world banks with offices in Antigua include the Royal Bank of Canada ( RBC ) and Scotiabank . Financial-services corporations with offices in Antigua include PriceWaterhouseCoopers . The US Securities and Exchange Commission has accused the Antigua-based Stanford International Bank , owned by Texas billionaire Allen Stanford , of orchestrating a huge fraud which may have bilked investors of some $ 8 ; billion .
The twin-island nation 's agricultural production is focused on its domestic market and constrained by a limited water supply and a labor ( economics ) shortage stemming from the lure of higher wages in tourism and construction work .
Manufacturing is made up of enclave-type assembly for export , the major products being bedding , handicrafts and electronic components . Prospects for economic growth in the medium term will continue to depend on income growth in the industrialised world , especially in the United States , from which about one-third of all tourists come .
Access to biocapacity is lower than world average . In 2016 , Antigua and Barbuda had 0.8 global hectares of biocapacity per person within its territory , much less than the world average of 1.6 global hectares per person . In 2016 Antigua and Barbuda used 4.3 global hectares of biocapacity per person - their ecological footprint of consumption . This means they use more biocapacity than Antigua and Barbuda contains . As a result , Antigua and Barbuda are running a biocapacity deficit .
Following the opening of the American University of Antigua College of Medicine by investor and attorney Neil Simon in 2003 , a new source of revenue was established . The university employs many local Antiguans and the approximate 1000 students consume a large amount of the goods and services .
Antigua and Barbuda also uses an economic citizenship program to spur investment into the country .
==Education==
Antigua and Barbuda has a greater than 90 % literacy rate . In 1998 , Antigua and Barbuda adopted a national mandate to become the pre-eminent provider of medical services in the Caribbean . As part of this mission , Antigua and Barbuda built the most technologically advanced hospital in the Caribbean , the Mt . St. John Medical Centre . The island of Antigua currently has three foreign-owned for-profit education for-profit offshore medical school . The island 's medical schools cater mostly to foreign students but contribute to the local economy and health care . The three schools are :
* The American University of Antigua , College of Medicine ( AUA ) , founded in 2004
* The University of Health Sciences Antigua ( UHSA ) , founded in 1982
* The Metropolitan University College of Medicine .
There is also the government-run Antigua State College as well as the Antigua and Barbuda Institute of Information Technology ( ABIIT ) and the Antigua and Barbuda Hospitality Training Institute ( ABHTI ) . In 2019 , the University of the West Indies opened its fifth campus overall ( and fourth physical campus ) in University of the West Indies at Five Islands . The country was previously served solely by the University of the West Indies Open Campus .
Island Academy International , which offers the International Baccalaureate , is the only international school in the country . There are also many other private schools but these institutions tend to follow the same local curriculum ( CXCs ) as government schools .
==Culture==
The culture is predominantly a mixture of West African and British cultural influences .
Cricket is the national sport . Other popular sports include football , boat racing and surfing . ( Antigua Sailing Week attracts locals and visitors from all over the world ) .
Calypso music and soca music , both originating primarily out of Trinidad and Tobago , are important in Antigua and Barbuda .
===Festivals===
The national Carnival held each August commemorates the abolition of slavery in the British West Indies , although on some islands , Carnival may celebrate the coming of Lent . Its festive pageants , shows , contests and other activities are a major tourist attraction .
===Cuisine===
Corn and sweet potatoes play an important role in Antiguan cuisine . For example , a popular Antiguan dish , Dukuna is a sweet , steamed dumpling made from grated sweet potatoes , flour and spices . One of the Antiguan staple foods , cou-cou , is a cooked paste made of cornmeal and water .
===Media===
There are three newspapers : the Antigua Daily Observer , Antigua New Room and The Antiguan Times . The Antigua Observer is the only daily printed newspaper .
The local television channel ABS TV 10 is available ( it is the only station that shows exclusively local programs ) . There are also several local and regional radio stations , such as V2C-AM 620 , ZDK-AM 1100 , VYBZ-FM 92.9 , ZDK-FM 97.1 , Observer Radio 91.1 FM , DNECA Radio 90.1 FM , Second Advent Radio 101.5 FM , Abundant Life Radio 103.9 FM , Crusader Radio 107.3 FM , Nice FM 104.3.
===Literature===
Antiguan author Jamaica Kincaid has published over 20 works of literature .
==Sports==
The Antigua and Barbuda national cricket team represented the country at the 1998 Commonwealth Games , but Antiguan cricketers otherwise play for the Leeward Islands cricket team in domestic matches and the West Indies cricket team internationally . The 2007 Cricket World Cup was hosted in the West Indies from 11 March to 28 April 2007.
Antigua hosted eight matches at the Sir Vivian Richards Stadium , which was completed on 11 February 2007 and can hold up to 20,000 people .
Antigua is a Host of Stanford Twenty20  Twenty20 Cricket , a version started by Allen Stanford in 2006 as a regional cricket game with almost all Caribbean islands taking part .
Rugby football and netball are popular as well .
Association football , or soccer , is also a very popular sport . Antigua has a Antigua and Barbuda national football team which entered FIFA World Cup qualification for the 1974 tournament and for 1986 and onwards . A professional team was formed in 2011 , Antigua Barracuda FC , which played in the USL Pro , a lower professional league in the USA . The nation 's team had a major achievement in 2012 , getting out of its preliminary group for the 2014 FIFA World Cup , notably due to a victory over powerful Haiti . In its first game in the next CONCACAF group play on 8 June 2012 in Tampa , FL , Antigua and Barbuda , comprising 17 Barracuda players and 7 from the lower English professional leagues , scored a goal against the United States . However , the team lost 3:1 to the US .
== Symbols ==
The national bird is the frigate bird , and the national tree is the Bucida buceras ( Whitewood tree ) .
Clare Waight Keller included agave karatto to represent Antigua and Barbuda in Meghan Markle 's Wedding of Prince Harry and Meghan Markle veil , which included the distinctive flora of each Commonwealth of Nations country .
==See also==
* Geology of Antigua and Barbuda
* Outline of Antigua and Barbuda
* Index of Antigua and Barbuda-related articles
* Bibliography of Antigua and Barbuda
* Transport in Antigua and Barbuda
==References==
==External links==
*
*
* Antigua and Barbuda , United States Library of Congress
* Antigua and Barbuda . The World Factbook . Central Intelligence Agency .
* Antigua and Barbuda from UCB Libraries GovPubs
*
* Antigua and Barbuda from the BBC News
* World Bank 's country data profile for Antigua and Barbuda
* ArchaeologyAntigua.org  2010March13 source of archaeological information for Antigua and Barbuda
Category : Antigua and Barbuda
Category : Countries in the Caribbean
Category : Island countries
Category : Commonwealth realms
Category : Countries in North America
Category : English-speaking countries and territories
Category : Member states of the Caribbean Community
Category : Member states of the Commonwealth of Nations
Category : Member states of the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States
Category : Member states of the United Nations
Category : Small Island Developing States
Category : British Leeward Islands
Category : Former British colonies and protectorates in the Americas
Category : Former colonies in North America
Category:1630s establishments in the Caribbean
Category:1632 establishments in the British Empire
Category:1981 disestablishments in the United Kingdom
Category : States and territories established in 1981
Category:1981 establishments in Antigua and Barbuda * <article_end>